---
title: Hyperion
author: Dan Simmons
date: 2023-05-07
image: /images/books/3146.jpg
description: Seven pilgrims set out on a potentially fatal one-way trip to visit the Time Tombs on the planet of Hyperion, where a godlike killing machine called the Shrike will possibly grant one of them a wish -- and probably slaughter the rest...
---

The whole book is modeled on Chaucer's Canterbury tales, and filled with multiple references to the poet John Keats. There is so much high literary content in the book, all set against a backdrop of hard science fiction. There is very little NOT to love about this book.

The hegemony of man has expanded across hundreds of planets and star systems. There are several planets which are not yet part of the Hegemony, and are effectively outside the common law. And then there are the Ousters, space dwellers who occasionally raid planets for resources. Hyperion is a very strange and unusual planet, existing outside the hegemony. There was an ancient civilization there once, but they are long extinct. The planet is home to a set of extremely unusual structures called Time Tombs, empty buildings which move backward in time. Guarding them is the Shrike, a gigantic creature that kills by slicing, dicing and impaling its victims.

Seven pilgrims are chosen to make one final trip to Hyperion, and the time tombs, before the war with the Ousters threatens to engulf the planet. During the journey, each pilgrim tells their tale, and speaks of their association with Hyperion and why they are making the trip. Each person slowly reveals a little more of the plot and the backstory.
- The Priest's tale is one of horror, as a priest stumbles on a group of strange creatures, who are of the cruciform
- The Soldier's tale is one of love and action, equal parts thriller and mystery and romance.
- The Poet's tale is one of humour, of the crude and fast-talking poet reliving his life and his time with Sad King Billy
- The Scholar's tale is a sad one, where the scholar is moving worlds to cure his beloved daughter afflicted by the strange environment of the Time Tombs
- The Detective's tale is a weak one, relatively. A reincarnated poet John Keats is on the run and the detective is trying her best to protect him, and unravel his connection to Hyperion
- The Consul's tale is one of vengeance against all of humanity, for all the greed, cruelty and ugliness it encompasses

The scope of imagination, wordplay, and critical analysis of humankind is astounding. The "frame" structure of the story is superbly done. Each following story added a significant layer of depth to the book. I could write pages but still fail to do justice to the magnificence that is this book.

An absolute must read. I cannot wait to start on the sequel. 
