---
title: The Picture of Dorian Gray
author: Oscar Wilde
date: 2023-03-27
image: /images/books/3142.jpg
description: A classic study of shallowness, vanity, casual cruelty and hedonistic selfishness, all presented as a suspenseful Gothic horror novel
---

Oscar Wilde's celebrated book is a Gothic horror novel with the central theme
of the effects of evil and debauchery. Dorian Gray is a young, extremely
good-looking man with an appreciation of art and beauty. His friend, the artist
Basil Hallward, paints a portrait of Dorian. While Dorian poses for the
portrait, he meets Hallward's friend, a Lord Henry Wotton.

At the meeting, Dorian becomes enthralled with Lord Henry's world view, which
is a form of radical hedonism, and outright rejection of all that would be
classified a "decent" behaviour, and posits that the only worthwhile life is
one spent pursuing beauty and satisfaction for the senses.

When Basil gifts Dorian the portrait, Dorian strikes a Faustian bargain: "If it
were I who was to be always young, and the picture that was to grow old!"

As Dorian Gray sinks into a life of crime and gross sensuality, his body
retains perfect youth and vigor while his recently painted portrait grows day
by day into a hideous record of evil, which he must keep hidden from the world.

And this is where the real depravity begins. Dorian’s world has no
consequences. Everything he does is attributed to the painting, everything. Any
regret or malice leaves him quickly and is transferred to the canvas. So he
can’t technically feel emotion for an extended period of time; thus, his
attitude becomes one of nonchalance. He becomes a shell, an emotionless
creature who can only seek his sin: vanity.

Interestingly, even at his worst, he retains a semblance of the original
innocence, a part of him believing that he may be redeemed. He is fighting the
inner struggle, and constantly asking himself, "Do I want to be good?" "Can I
resist being bad?"

A classic must read book.
