---
title: The Build-Up
lastmod: 2005-10-10
layout: trip
prev: /trips/2009
up: /trips/2008
successor: /trips/2011
---

Over May-June of 2005, the idea of doing a ride in the             Himalayas later in the year was conceived. After numerous team             changes and route planning, the trip was finalised. 30 days of             riding, starting from the 12 of August. 15 days in the Garhwal             &amp; Kumaon Himalayas, which Sandy, Prashi and I would do,             followed by 15 days in Lahoul-Spiti, for which Prashi and I had             definite plans.

In July, heavy floods in the Simla-Manali sector saw a few             more route changes, as the complete Lahoul-Spiti valley was cut             off. At the same time, a group of riders from Chandigarh rode             into Zanskar valley which, for a change, was NOT cut off. So             now, the only concrete plan left was this:

>  Let's get there and see what can be done. 

Meanwhile, my bike got a makeover. New chain sprocket set,             piston rings, connecting rods, a borrowed tank and side-shields,             strengthened shock absorbers and a carrier to hold 20 litres of             fuel. I had to do a marathon 650km ride in one day at run-in             speed to get the new piston rings to set.

Our tickets to Delhi were booked for the 12th August. On the             night of 11th, two friends of ours had a nasty road accident,             where one passed away and the other was in hospital requiring             surgery. This left us completely shaken, and the whole ride was             nearly shelved. After much consideration, we decided to get to             Delhi first, and then plan forward from there.

We spend the entire afternoon of the 12th in the Yeshwantpur             railway station, packing the bikes and bribing every petty             official in sight to load the bikes onto the night's train.


