---
title: I'm comin' up, so you better get the party started
lastmod: 2005-10-10
layout: trip
up: /trips/2008
prev: /trips/2035
successor: /trips/2037
---

&nbsp;
- 27th of August


After a long time, we had the luxury of sleeping till late in             the morning. We had a good old Kannadiga-style breakfast at             Kamat's and about 11:00AM, ambled over to New Delhi Railway             Station and picked up Chaithra's Thunderbird. Surprisingly, both             the bike and our wallets came out unscathed. I guess it was just             a one-off thing... dunno. Anyway, for lunch, we were back at             Kamat's. After two weeks of Aloo Parathas, even Raagi Mudde's             tasted great.

In the afternoon, Karthik of Royal Beasts met us, and             re-worked our itinerary. Our original plan was to leave Delhi             post-lunch, but Karthik insisted that we join the Beasts at a             party that evening and leave the next day. Sandy left for the             Airport, as the rest of us packed our bikes and headed to the             party at Karthik's place.

Quite some party too, it was. A Royal Beasts party is much             like a RTMC or a Madbull party (maybe not quite as wild,             though). Loud music, booze flows freely and dance floor. The one             difference was the presence of super-hot babes, the kind that             adorn our desktop wallpapers. But they studiedly avoid all             bikers, and spent the entire evening on the balcony next to the             party. Huh ?

A minor ragging session ensued for Suresh of Royal Beasts, for             the incident at the petrol             pump at Bhowali. I am still at a loss at how he could have             got scared of Prashi. Prashi looks like a strong wind could blow             him off his feet.


