---
title: Polo
layout: trip
up: /trips/2008
prev: /trips/2054
successor: /trips/2056
---

&nbsp;

- 3rd of September
- _Leh &amp; Choglamsar_


September 1st was the start of the 15 day Ladakh festival. Lots             of shows, games, religious meets, carnivals, parades were all on             the agenda. The whole of Leh was decorated with flyers and             flags. Furthermore, Leh is the centre of Tibetan Buddhism in the             world, ever since the Chinese occupation of Tibet. Every             intersection has a 3 metre large red-and-gold prayer wheel.             Small stupa-like structures can be found on every street corner.

The third of September had two main events on the Ladakh             festival agenda. The first was a visit by the Dalai Lama to the             monastery at Choglamsar, and the second, a Polo match. We woke             up in the morning to strains of Buddhist chanting from the             monastery next door. Following that was a long religious             discourse, which failed to sustain our interest. We did get a             glimpse of the bespectacled religious leader, though.

Our own agenda for the day was simple. Fix Prashi's bike and             get an inner-line permit. At ten, we hit the district             commissioner's office in Leh. While the DC himself was at the             monastery, the office was still operational, and we got the             permit in a couple of hours or so. The DC's office is just next             to the Polo grounds, and we spent our time watching the Polo             match in progress. The rules are pretty similar to football             (soccer), and the home team decimated the visitors. Did I             mention we ran into our cyclist friends at the polo grounds ?

On the way back to Choglamsar, we stopped at a welding shop and             got Prashi's bike carrier fixed too. The prayer meeting and just             concluded, and the streets were choked with devotees leaving the             monastery. It took us a good couple of hours to get through the             15km from Leh to Choglamsar.

We spent the evening in Leh. Saw a couple of really fancy             vehicles. We saw a Honda Goldwing cruiser with East Bangalore             license plates, and a Mercedes off-road van with dirt bikes             clamped outside. Oh yeah, we ran into our cyclist friends,             again, at the German bakery.

Searching for more bikes, we came across an RX-135 from             Bangalore, whose owner turned out to be an old school chum of             mine, Sanjay Bhansali. He'd ridden up with couple of other guys,             including another school chum, Subroto. What a small world!


