---
title: A Bridge too far
lastmod: 2005-10-10
layout: trip
up: /trips/2008
prev: /trips/2073
successor: /trips/2075
---

&nbsp;

- 8th of September
- _Keylong - Tandi - Keylong_
- 14km


We spoke to some BRO engineers we met at breakfast. They were             the most authoritative source of information we had found so             far. They maintained that it would be a week at least, probably             much more before the bridge was navigable. Bad news, bad news.             We had to be in Delhi by the 11th. No slippage, since Prashi's             &amp; Ranga's flights were on the 12th, and Chaithra's was on             13th.

There was a small ferry of sorts across the river, hauled to             either side by a system of ropes. It's called a Jhula or cradle,             and seats two grown men uncomfortably. Not only couldn't it             carry our bikes across, there was also a 5 hour long queue on             either side to use the damn contraption. We spent the rest of             the day researching alternate routes. Among those considered             were:

1. Back up to Suraj Tal, across Baralacha La, down to Kumzum               La via Chandra Tal, then Lichu, Batal, Gramphu, Rohtang La and               Manali. 
  
    _Distance: 200km to Manali, and 480 to Delhi from there._
2. A marathon run, back the way we came. Leh, Kargil,               Srinagar, Pathankot and back to Delhi. 
  
    _Distance: nearly 2000km, I guess_
3. To Tandi, and on to Udaipur. The locals claimed that the               BRO had just cut two roads out from Udaipur, one towards Jammu               and the other towards Chamba. These were not on any map, and               all we knew about them was hearsay. 
  
    _Distance: entirely unknown_

There wasn't much to choose from. The first route was closed,             since there were many landslides near Kumzum La. The second was             simply too much to be done in 3 days. It would have been pushing             it beyond endurance levels. By nightfall, we were all set to             ride into the unknown. I rode back to Tandi to fill up my can             too, since I had little idea how much farther we had to go             before refueling.

By now, the number of stranded travellers at Keylong had             doubled, and most were waiting for the bridge to get fixed. A             few were also set to go back the Leh-Srinagar way. The Tandi             pump's diesel had now been long exhausted, and that left many             with little choice.


