---
title: The Walrus and The Carpenter
poem: true
layout: post
author: Carroll, Lewis
---
The sun was shining on the sea,  
&nbsp; Shining with all his might:  
He did his very best to make  
&nbsp; The billows smooth and bright --  
And this was odd, because it was  
&nbsp; The middle of the night.  

The moon was shining sulkily,  
&nbsp; Because she thought the sun  
Had got no business to be there  
&nbsp; After the day was done --  
'It's very rude of him.' she said,  
&nbsp; 'To come and spoil the fun!'  

The sea was wet as wet could be,  
&nbsp; The sands were dry as dry.  
You could not see a cloud, because  
&nbsp; No cloud was in the sky:  
No birds were flying overhead --  
&nbsp; There were no birds to fly.  

The Walrus and the Carpenter  
&nbsp; Were walking close at hand:  
They wept like anything to see  
&nbsp; Such quantities of sand:  
'If this were only cleared away,'  
&nbsp; They said, 'it would be grand.'  

'If seven maids with seven mops  
&nbsp; Swept it for half a year,  
Do you suppose,' the Walrus said,  
&nbsp; 'That they could get it clear?'  
'I doubt it,' said the Carpenter,  
&nbsp; And shed a bitter tear.  

'O Oysters, come and walk with us!  
&nbsp; The Walrus did beseech.  
'A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,  
&nbsp; Along the briny beach:  
We cannot do with more than four,  
&nbsp; To give a hand to each.'  

The eldest Oyster looked at him,  
&nbsp; But never a word he said:  
The eldest Oyster winked his eye,  
&nbsp; And shook his heavy head --  
Meaning to say he did not choose  
&nbsp; To leave the oyster-bed.  

Out four young Oysters hurried up.  
&nbsp; All eager for the treat:  
Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,  
&nbsp; Their shoes were clean and neat --  
And this was odd, because, you know,  
&nbsp; They hadn't any feet.  

Four other Oysters followed them,  
&nbsp; And yet another four;  
And thick and fast they came at last,  
&nbsp; And more, and more, and more --  
All hopping through the frothy waves,  
&nbsp; And scrambling to the shore.  

The Walrus and the Carpenter  
&nbsp; Walked on a mile or so,  
And then they rested on a rock  
&nbsp; Conveniently low:  
And all the little Oysters stood  
&nbsp; And waited in a row.  

'The time has come,' the Walrus said,  
&nbsp; 'To talk of many things:  
Of shoes -- and ships -- and sealing wax --  
&nbsp; Of cabbages -- and kings --  
And why the sea is boiling hot --  
&nbsp; And whether pigs have wings.'  

'But wait a bit,' the Oysters cried,  
&nbsp; 'Before we have our chat;  
For some of us are out of breath,  
&nbsp; And all of us are fat!'  
'No hurry!' said the Carpenter.  
&nbsp; They thanked him much for that.  

'A loaf of bread,' the Walrus said,  
&nbsp; 'Is what we chiefly need:  
Pepper and vinegar besides  
&nbsp; Are very good indeed --  
Now, if you're ready, Oysters dear,  
&nbsp; We can begin to feed.'  

'But not on us!' the Oysters cried,  
&nbsp; Turning a little blue.  
'After such kindness, that would be  
&nbsp; A dismal thing to do!'  
'The night is fine,' the Walrus said,  
&nbsp; 'Do you admire the view?'  

'It was so kind of you to come!  
&nbsp; And you are very nice!'  
The Carpenter said nothing but  
&nbsp; 'Cut us another slice-  
I wish you were not quite so deaf-  
&nbsp; I've had to ask you twice!'  

'It seems a shame,' the Walrus said,  
&nbsp; 'To play them such a trick.  
After we've brought them out so far,  
&nbsp; And made them trot so quick!'  
The Carpenter said nothing but  
&nbsp; 'The butter's spread too thick!'  

'I weep for you,'the Walrus said:  
&nbsp; 'I deeply sympathize.'  
With sobs and tears he sorted out  
&nbsp; Those of the largest size,  
Holding his pocket-handkerchief  
&nbsp; Before his streaming eyes.  

'O Oysters,' said the Carpenter,  
&nbsp; 'You've had a pleasant run!  
Shall we be trotting home again?'  
&nbsp; But answer came there none --  
And this was scarcely odd, because  
&nbsp; They'd eaten every one.

