---
title: Why Self-Hosting?
description: What self hosting is, and why would anyone ever want to do such a thing...
image: /images/front/selfhosted.jpg
sequence: 1
---

## The case for Self-Hosting

There is a ton of cool free stuff on the internet. Sites which offer one the
ability to create and share data, send and receive emails, maintain schedules,
save bookmarks, read news, or even search the internet... and all for free.
There are limits, of course, but those limits are largely higher than what one
would need for personal use.

The purported business model of the companies behind these sites is to offer a
premium paid access to the same services, which includes benefits such as
larger storage, fewer ads, or unlock some additional features not available to
users in the free tier. 

Corporations are not altruistic by nature, and are subtly monetising the
aforementioned "free" services. One of the ways that happens is that the very
same data, emails, schedules, bookmarks and news subscriptions that the user
stores on the "free" services are analysed in real time to put together a
profile for each user, which is then sold to advertisement agencies
specializing in targeted advertising.

Often we wonder why a simple search for a holiday destination yields
advertisements in travel deals, hotel deals, news articles about the
destination... that's targeted advertisement. The search triggers an update to
the user profile, which the advertising agencies pick-up and tweak their
algorithms on what should be fed to the user.

In short, when something is available for "free", the user is the product.

But it doesn't stop there. In spite of their pages of legalese outlining their
terms and conditions, there is nothing that prevents these companies for using
all available data about a user for any purpose, whatsoever. Advertising, all
told, is relatively innocuous. But the mind boggles with nefarious ends that
bad actors (either the corporations themselves, or someone else who has access
to the data) could use all the data available to them.

The only way to not be folded into the massive advertising juggernaut and
simultaneously safeguard ourselves, would be to NOT use any of the above
services. But that is akin to putting toothpaste back in a tube. The internet
and the limitless benefits it offers have made it indispensable to our normal
lives.

## Enter Self-Hosting

**Self-Hosting** is the concept in which a user _hosts_ their own applications,
data, and more. Taking away the "unknown" factor in how their data is managed
and stored, this provides those with the willingness to learn and the mind to
do so to take control of their data without losing the functionality of
services they otherwise use frequently.

For instance, a user might love the easy access and wide-spread integration
that DropBox provides, but may not be fond of having all their most sensitive
data stored in a data-storage container that they do not have direct control
over. Multiple alternatives, such as NextCloud and SeaFile, are available. With
a little bit of jugglery with inexpensive hardware and an always on internet
connection (with some caveats), the data can remain secure on their own hard
disk, while still providing easy access.

## How Hard Is It?

Truth be told, there is no single drag-and-drop way to get started with
self-hosting. There is some level of fiddling with bits and bobs, and some need
of running commands on a dreaded black screen with a flashing cursor. 

That said, it isn't like a degree in computer engineering is mandatory for
getting there either. The reality, as always, is somewhere in the middle. Any
lay user without an aversion to the aforementioned fiddling and running
commands can pull it off.

Once the base infrastructure is in place, there are several tools available to
make the whole process painless and smooth for adding further services and
capabilities.
