---
title: Watchmen
comic: true
description: Seminal graphic novel which chronicles the fall-from-grace of a beloved set of super-heroes, victims of their all-too-human failings.
image: /images/comics/watchmen.jpg
---

Oft cited as the best work by its author, Alan Moore, this is the comic book which redefined the genre completely, and demonstrated what the medium is capable of. It elevated the comic book beyond the "comic" tag, and established the concept of a "graphic" novel.

The fundamental theme of the book is that no one is completely evil or good.

Everyone has reasons for being the monster, good person, or something in between, always haunted by past traumas. Much of the complex, brilliant plot is directly connected to the protagonists' backstories, which makes it even more compelling, because the reader is expecting and getting what she/he is waiting for. Especially the evolution from weak to superhuman, more and less powerful, and the thereby modified morality, ambitions, and personal goals of the characters are used to demonstrate the inner fragmentation of human psyches, no matter how demolished and totally wasted they already were before.

I am utterly unqualified to delve into the intricacies of the complex and layered story line and much less review the same.

In most circles, this is considered one of the greatest, if not the absolute greatest comic books ever written. I wouldn't go so far, but few other comics provide such a the deep, thought-provoking plot all the while mixing it up with jokes and subtle parodies.

An absolute must read, and a must on all bookshelves.
