---
title: Global Frequency
lastmod: 2023-05-18
description: Short-lived series from Warren Ellis, with a great premise
image: /images/comics/gf.jpg
---

This fast-paced thriller of planetary terrors and world annihilation introduces
The Global Frequency, an independent defense intelligence organization that
secretly defuses the lingering threats and dormant experiments of the 20th
century. Unknown to the world at large, this secret society of 1,001 specialty
sleeper agents is called upon to prevent the impending threats of Armageddon
that were created by careless governments and immoral scientists over the last
century. In this hard-hitting first volume, various expert operatives are sent
on desperate individual missions to thwart an alien virus invasion, destroy a
nuclear-powered cyborg, and deactive a hidden Ebola bomb.

Miranda Zero, the mysterious leader/benefactor/recruiter of Global Frequency is
is always at hand to call in the correct specialist, with her catch phrase:
"You're on the global frequency!"

The albums all have excellent artwork, each drawn by a different artist. Where
the series falls short is the storyline.

While the premise is intruiging, the whole enterprise seems very contrived. We
know nothing about the Global Frequency itself, it’s just there, the characters
are just there and have been part of the group for years. The villains are just
one-dimensional and exist only to serve as villains. Except for Miranda
herself, no other character appears in more than one album, so no backstory or
character development ever happens.

Each story follows a standard pattern; a end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it
scenario, a few specialists tapped with the repeated "You're on the Global
Frequency" line, and a race against time to defuse the situation.

After a dozen albums, I think even the author got bored.
