---
title: Fra Angelico
image: /images/art/angelico_1.jpg
born: 1400
died: 1455
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/angelico_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/angelico_1.jpg
    title: The Annunciation
    width: 1008
    height: 700
  - image: /images/art/angelico_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/angelico_2.jpg
    title: Fiesole Altarpiece
    width: 1700
    height: 1274
  - image: /images/art/angelico_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/angelico_3.jpg
    title: San Marco Altarpiece
    width: 2024
    height: 1962
  - image: /images/art/angelico_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/angelico_4.jpg
    title: Deposition of Christ
    width: 1098
    height: 1037
  - image: /images/art/angelico_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/angelico_5.jpg
    title: Niccoline Chapel
    width: 897
    height: 1200
---

Fra Angelico was both a Florentine painter and a Dominican friar. He made
several trips to Rome to execute papal commissions; and he was prior of San
Domenico in Fiesole from 1449 to 1452.  He was known as the Blessed Angelico,
and during his lifetime both his gentle, disciplined personality and his art
were held in the highest esteem. The tenderness and delicate beauty of his work
were ideally suited for the specific religious purpose for which it was
produced.

With the help of many assistants, Fra Angelico decorated the cloister, the
cells, the common rooms and the corridors of the convent of San Marco in
Florence with some fifty frescoes. Of them all _The Annunciation_ is probably
the most famous. It was painted on a wall of the convent cloister, and the
receding vaulted arches of the outside loggia, in which the Virgin sits,
reflect the fresco’s surroundings as well as giving space and depth to its
composition. Inscribed on the border of the loggia’s stone floor is a quotation
in Latin from a twelfth-century hymn : ‘Hail Mother, noble resting place of all
the Holy Trinity.’ Along the edge of the floor is a reminder to the friars of
the convent : ‘When you come before the image of the spotless Virgin, beware
lest through carelessness the Ave be left unsaid.’

[![The Annunciation](/images/art/angelico_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/angelico_1.jpg){:.popup}
The soft pale colours and comparatively simple structure give the painting a
sparkling serenity, and a directness that is charming, if a little naive. If
Mary and the Angel were to stand up, their heads would no doubt touch the
ceiling; yet the springtime scene is convincing, and painted with great care
and attention to detail, particularly in the intricate decoration of the
Angel’s robe and the colourful patterning of his wings.

The figures have a weightlessness and stillness about them which makes them
seem more spiritual. It is a painting about the communication of faith, and as
the friars walked in the cloister of San Marco the event depicted must have
seemed very real to them.
