---
title: Hieronymous Bosch
layout: artist
image: /images/art/bosch_1.jpg
born: 1450
died: 1516
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/bosch_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/bosch_1_small.jpg
    title: The Garden of Earthly Delights (Exterior Panel)
    width: 876
    height: 950
  - image: /images/art/bosch_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/bosch_2_small.jpg
    title: The Garden of Earthly Delights (Left Panel; The Garden of Eden)
    width: 1769
    height: 4319
  - image: /images/art/bosch_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/bosch_3_small.jpg
    title: The Garden of Earthly Delights (Centre Panel)
    width: 4016
    height: 4315
  - image: /images/art/bosch_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/bosch_4_small.jpg
    title: The Garden of Earthly Delights (Right Panel; Hell)
    width: 1778
    height: 4324
---

The Flemish painter Hieronymus Bosch was one of the world’s greatest masters of
fantasy. His haunted work, full of monsters and devils, reflected the
superstitious and religious beliefs which had survived from the early Middle
Ages. He fathered no school of followers in his own time, although he was a
distinguished artist, but his influence has continued for nearly five hundred
years, and is easy to detect in the work of the Surrealists of the twentieth
century.

Four paintings on a series of folding panels make up _The Garden of Earthly
Delights_. When the outer wings are closed we see the Third Day of Creation
(or, according to a recent interpretation, the destruction of the earth by
flood). When the wings are opened they reveal astonishing scenes in subtle
colour and mesmerizing detail. On the left is the Garden of Eden, in the centre
the Garden of Earthly Delights, which is thought to depict the world before the
Flood, and on the right a terrifying vision of Hell.

[![The Garden of Earthly Delights](/images/art/bosch_3.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/bosch_3.jpg){:.popup}
The meaning of the work as a whole is uncertain, but the sense of a powerful
allegory is beyond doubt. Over half of Bosch’s surviving paintings have
religious subjects, and his work can only be interpreted in a religious
framework; his art was, as a Spanish cleric remarked, ‘a painted satire on the
sins and ravings of man’. It studied those human feelings which in the Middle
Ages were thought to be the result of divine or devilish inspiration. Bosch
was painting at the climax of a period when people firmly believed in the
existence of grotesque demons; it was also a time of robust, even cruel humour.

This great work, with its imaginary buildings, landscapes of parks and gardens
and dark fire-lit inferno, exposes humanity in a truly terrifying light. In the
central panel a wild sexual orgy is depicted showing every imaginable aspect of
lust, the cause of man’s downfall, and revealing his ignorance and corruption.
Writhing human bodies are dwarfed by massive birds, fish and fruits: one figure
carries off another on his back in a huge mussel shell; a man and a woman are
encased in a bubble on the back of a strange sea creature; strawberries, fish,
flowers, exotic birds and animals are all involved with men and women in the
act of love. People can be seen riding an assortment of animals in a ring in
the middle distance: pigs, camels, horses, goats, unicorns and strange
unrecognizable creatures that are part-animal, part-bird. In the work as a
whole there are something like a thousand human figures.

Bosch’s dazzling inventiveness seems endless. He has created an extraordinary,
fascinating fantasy world, full of weird exaggerations and distortions, but he
has done it with such care and detail that he has turned its nightmarish
terrors into reality.
