---
title: Sandro Botticelli
layout: artist
image: /images/art/botticelli_1.jpg
born: 1445
died: 1510
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/botticelli_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/botticelli_1_small.jpg
    title: The Birth of Venus
    width: 3000
    height: 1884
  - image: /images/art/botticelli_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/botticelli_2_small.jpg
    title: Primavera
    width: 1970
    height: 1294
  - image: /images/art/botticelli_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/botticelli_3_small.jpg
    title: The Adoration of the Magi
    width: 1661
    height: 1353
---


Botticelli was born in Florence and spent most of his life there. Many of his
paintings have devotional subjects and were designed for specific settings in
churches and other religious buildings.

But he was also the first painter of the Renaissance to use classical myths as
central subject matter in his work. _The Birth of Venus_ was almost certainly
executed for Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco’s Villa di Costello near Florence.

Botticelli was unaffected by the passion for realism that was current in his
day. In _The Birth of Venus_ he makes little attempt to persuade us of the
reality of the scene, but we are completely convinced that we are witness to a
splendid moment in the world of ancient myth.

![The Birth of Venus](/images/art/botticelli_1.jpg){:.image .right}
Legend tells us that Venus, the Roman goddess of love and fertility, was born
from sea-foam, and here she is seen slowly floating on her shell-boat in to the
shore.  The navigation of her journey is undertaken by two intertwined figures,
male and female, representing the winds. The male, Zephyr, the west wind of
springtime, supports the female, who is probably Flora, his wife. Just where
the sea touches the shore, a young woman adorned with leaves and flowers steps
forward to envelop Venus in a flowered cloak.

Venus herself, her wide grey eyes gentle and a little pensive, embodies here
not sensual love but perfect beauty. The draperies of the winds, the flowing
clothes of Venus’s welcoming attendant, and her own glorious golden hair
flickering through the painting like flames, are not naturalistic, but are used
to create a feeling of movement about to be resolved.  With one arm Venus
partly covers her breasts, and with the other she artfully arranges her hair as
a modest covering in the traditional pose of classical statues of the goddess
of love. Her left leg bears most of her body weight so that her hip is thrust
gently forward, giving a sinuous S curve to her body. There is flowing, curving
line throughout the composition, in the sharply defined, highly stylized
shoreline, the beautifully arched feet of the human figures and the movement of
drapery and hair.

The landscape is decorative rather than realistic : the waves of the sea are
indicated by little white V shapes; the tree trunks are slim brown rods, and
the wings of the winds and the sharp spiky leaves of the trees are outlined in
gold. There is no physical depth or perspective in the painting; but this
heightens the feeling that we are present at a mysterious and magical event,
depicted with the delicate beauty which characterizes Botticelli’s work.
