---
title: Paul Cézanne
layout: artist
image: /images/art/cezanne_1.jpg
born: 1839
died: 1906
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/cezanne_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/cezanne_1_small.jpg
    title: La Montague Sainte-Victoire
    width: 1571
    height: 1037
  - image: /images/art/cezanne_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/cezanne_2_small.jpg
    title: Rideau, Cruchon et Compotier 
    width: 1270
    height: 1042
  - image: /images/art/cezanne_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/cezanne_3_small.jpg
    title: Card Players
    width: 1210
    height: 992
  - image: /images/art/cezanne_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/cezanne_4_small.jpg
    title: The Bathers
    width: 1149
    height: 961 
  - image: /images/art/cezanne_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/cezanne_5_small.jpg
    title: Apothéose de Delacroix
    width: 1498
    height: 1153
---

The work of Paul Cézanne has had such a far-reaching influence that he has been
called the father of modern painting. It was not until the end of his life,
however, that his genius was widely recognized. In the year after his death a
major exhibition of his work was held, which startled the world.

He was born in Southern France, the son of a wealthy banker, but much of his
working life was spent in Paris, where he mixed with all the Impressionist
painters of his day. Whereas other artists in the group sought to capture
rapidly changing light and colour, Cézanne’s greatest achievement lay in
exposing in planes of colour the underlying shapes in nature, which he believed
to be the sphere, the cylinder and the cone.

[![La Montague Sainte-Victoire](/images/art/cezanne_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/cezanne_1.jpg){:.popup}
He applied this analysis of structure to _La Montague Sainte-Victoire_, a scene
in his native Provence. The greens and terracottas in the foreground fade
almost imperceptibly into the pale blues and pinks of the distant rocky
mountains, yet each individual area is made up of separate geometric slabs of
colour carefully worked together to form the shapes in the landscape.

The sharply defined outline of the mountain is framed by the branches of two
Mediterranean pine trees, the fields and houses set out in such a way that the
eye is guided through the painting to the Roman aqueduct in the middle
distance, and on to the peak of the mountain itself.  The horizontal planes are
perfectly balanced by the vertical tree trunk on the left and the tower of the
building beyond it.  The effect of distance is emphasized by the scale of the
foreground trees, but somehow the mountain’s bare surface seems to loom towards
us and dominate the peaceful cultivated scene.

Cézanne painted this landscape many times, and this calculated, finely balanced
picture reveals his intimate familiarity with his subject.

He became the most important of the Post-Impressionists, who concentrated in a
rigorously disciplined way on form and outline. In his technique of exposing
the structural shapes in nature he was also the forerunner of Cubism, which was
fully developed by Picasso and Braque. He was greatly respected and admired by
his fellow artists, and is generally considered now to be one of the most
brilliant painters of the last hundred years.
