---
title: Salvador Dali
lastmod: 2023-05-12
layout: artist
image: /images/art/dali_1.jpg
born: 1904
died: 1989
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/dali_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_1.jpg
    title: The Persistence of Memory
    width: 1400
    height: 1058
  - image: /images/art/dali_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_2.jpg
    title: Soft Construction with Boiled Beans (Premonition of Civil War)
    width: 1140
    height: 1200
  - image: /images/art/dali_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_3.jpg
    title: Dream Caused by the Flight of a Bumblebee around a Pomegranate a Second Before Awakening
    width: 960
    height: 1204
  - image: /images/art/dali_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_4.jpg
    title: Christ of Saint John of the Cross
    width: 960
    height: 1704
  - image: /images/art/dali_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_5.jpg
    title: Galatea of the Spheres
    width: 1000
    height: 1318
  - image: /images/art/dali_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_6.jpg
    title: Crucifixion (Corpus Hypercubus)
    width: 1006
    height: 1376
  - image: /images/art/dali_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_7.jpg
    title: The Ecumenical Council
    width: 864
    height: 1024
  - image: /images/art/dali_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_8.jpg
    title: The Hallucinogenic Toreador
    width: 1170
    height: 1600
  - image: /images/art/dali_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_9.jpg
    title: Invisible Afghan with the Apparition on the Beach of the Face of Garcia Lorca in the Form of a Fruit Dish with Three Figs
    width: 1400
    height: 1050
  - image: /images/art/dali_a.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_a.jpg
    width: 776
    height: 1036
    title: The Burning Giraffe
  - image: /images/art/dali_b.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_b.jpg
    width: 1500
    height: 1075
    title: Metamorphosis of Narcissus
  - image: /images/art/dali_c.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/dali_c.jpg
    width: 3088
    height: 2305
    title: Tuna Fishing
---

Perhaps the most spectacular personality in twentieth-century painting is
Salvador Dali. He was born in the Catalan region of Spain, and at seventeen
went to Madrid to study at the School of Fine Arts. He was suspended and
finally expelled for his outrageous behaviour and refusal to conform. He moved
to Paris, where he joined and became one of the leaders of the Surrealist
Movement, and as a result of his inventive genius and his flair for personal
publicity he has become its most famous representative.

His egotism, narcissism and showmanship have all contributed to the exotic
legend which surrounds him. (On the occasion of the International Surrealist
Exhibition in London in 1936, Dali lectured in a complete deep-sea diving
suit.) In 1937 he was expelled from the Surrealist Movement, and left for
America. Since then he has moved from one extreme to another: from embracing
revolutionary politics and producing highly provocative work, he has turned to
religious pictures and right-wing orthodox views. His life and paintings have
always caused violent reactions, but he has defined the aims of Surrealism more
precisely than any other artist. The work of Magritte is intellectual and turns
physical laws upside down to express an idea ; Dali appeals directly to the
emotions for an instinctive spontaneous reaction, and he does it with enormous
technical skill and originality.

[![The Persistence of Memory](/images/art/dali_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/dali_1.jpg){:.popup} 
The Persistence of Memory is an early work, and one of his most fascinating. In
a flat deserted landscape, probably based on the coast of Catalonia, Dali has
created the weird images of three limp watches. They are draped like rubber or
plasticine : one from a branch of a dead tree growing out of a wooden platform;
another, with a fly on the glass, over the edge of the platform itself; and a
third folded over what might be a distorted head on the ground.

Glistening ants have gathered on the metal back of an apparently normal watch
turned face downwards. The limp watches have been compared to the human tongue,
and they may have some erotic symbolism. Dali himself has characteristically
said that the idea came to him when he was eating a ripe Camembert cheese. His
autobiography Diary of a Genius tells us that he experienced hallucinations in
his childhood; as the title of the painting suggests, perhaps the subject was
inspired by persistent visions and memories from the past.

Like a dream, the picture is probably impossible fully to explain. Although
harmless, its images are threatening and disturbing, both because they are
unexpected and because they are so convincingly real. Daliâ€™s exaggeratedly
precise drawing and brushwork and transparently clear colours in the brilliant
Mediterranean light create a clinically accurate illusion of reality, which is
alarming, amusing and brilliantly inventive.

[![Invisible Afghan with the Apparition on the Beach of the Face of Garcia Lorca in the Form of a Fruit Dish with Three Figs](/images/art/dali_9.jpg){:.image .left}](/images/art/dali_9.jpg){:.popup}
The "paranoiac-critical" method used in Dali's "hand-painted dream photographs"
involved perceiving more than one image in a configuration. The dominant image
here is a face constructed from an urn and two men's heads; the figs are formed
by the rocks beyond. The outline of the Afghan hound takes shape through the
windswept clouds, its head resting on the cliffs and its paws on the sand.
Dali's friend, the poet Lorca, had been killed in the Spanish Civil War in 1936
and this may explain his apparition.
