---
title: Edgar Degas
layout: artist
image: /images/art/degas_2.jpg
born: 1834
died: 1917
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/degas_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_1.jpg
    title: The Bellelli Family
    width: 1247
    height: 998 
  - image: /images/art/degas_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_2.jpg
    title: The Ballet Class
    width: 924
    height: 1060
  - image: /images/art/degas_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_3.jpg
    title: The Absinthe
    width: 984
    height: 1350
  - image: /images/art/degas_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_4.jpg
    title: The Tub
    width: 1316
    height: 960
  - image: /images/art/degas_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_5.jpg
    title: The Dance Foyer at the Opera on the rue Le Peletier
    width: 1573
    height: 1068
  - image: /images/art/degas_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/degas_6.jpg
    title: The Laundresses
    width: 600 
    height: 556 
---

Degas, born in Paris, was the son of a wealthy banker, and for most of his life
he was free to paint without depending on his art for a livelihood. He was
something of a recluse, troubled from his early forties with failing eyesight,
a witty, formidable and forbidding character. He was a member of the
Impressionist group for a time, but his work was more academic than theirs, and
although he made intense studies of light and colour, he was fascinated
principally by movement.

Many of his pictures are of women - laundresses, hat-makers and, above all,
dancers - depicted in a deeply perceptive and sympathetic manner in paintings,
drawings and sculptures. His interest in movement can also be seen in his
pictures of horses in training, scenes at the racetrack and people at work.

[![The Dance Foyer at the Opera on the rue Le Peletier](/images/art/degas_5.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/degas_5.jpg){:.popup}
The French poet Baudelaire remarked that artists ‘must draw out of daily life
its epic aspect’, and this is precisely Degas’ achievement as he shows us an
everyday rehearsal at the ballet.

The painting has an air of uninterrupted activity. The dancers seem to be
unaware of an observer and nothing is posed : some exercising at the barre,
some listening and watching as the teacher instructs a soloist, and a violinist
waits to begin; one resting; one reading notices on a board at the back.

The horizontal red line of the barre forms a link between the groups of
dancers, and the red is picked up in the girls’ sashes and the fan on the
foreground chair, making a perfect rectangle.  The open space in the centre,
and the apparently random arrangement of people and chairs, accentuate the life
and immediacy of the painting. A mirror reflects a group outside the
composition and a girl whisks past a half-open door, perhaps on her way to
another studio; everything suggests that movement is continuing beyond the
scene portrayed.  Degas observed, analyzed and recorded with great care, by
means of numerous sketches from life, before beginning work on a canvas in the
studio. As a result he caught revealingly, and with extraordinary realism, the
movement and atmosphere of his subject.
