---
title: Duccio di Buoninsegna
born: 1255
died: 1319
image: /images/art/duccio_1.jpg
lastmod: 2023-06-26
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/duccio_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/duccio_1.jpg
    width: 1170
    height: 1912
    title: Maesta
  - image: /images/art/duccio_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/duccio_2.jpg
    width: 2029
    height: 1000
    title: The Rucellai Madonna
  - image: /images/art/duccio_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/duccio_3.jpg
    width: 1404
    height: 1861
    title: Madonna and Child
---

Duccio was the first and perhaps the greatest of the religious painters of
medieval Siena, then the capital of one of Italy’s northern city states. His
work sums up the highly formal tradition inherited from the eastern
civilization of Byzantium, but it is also more realistic and more natural.  In
the Middle Ages, when artists had been content to follow the Byzantine
tradition, their principal aim was to express their strong religious beliefs in
a highly decorative and spiritual way. Their figures were two-dimensional, and
they made little attempt to represent them accurately or realistically. Duccio
introduced something new: his work marks a turning point in that it began to
express the idea that a body has life, and it moves in a particular way. This
achievement had a profound effect on the Sienese painters who followed him.

[![The Rucellai Madonna](/images/art/duccio_2.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/duccio_2.jpg){:.popup}
In 1285 he painted _The Rucellai Madonna_, a large work named after the
aristocratic Rucellai family of Florence, who probably commissioned it and in
whose private chapel it was placed in the church of Santa Maria Novella.  The
characteristics of Byzantine art can be seen to persist in its decorative
formality: the Madonna and the Holy Child face towards us, the figures stylized
and rather stiff' against the gold background. The throne is an elaborate
structure, its architectural features symbolizing the Christian Church.  But
there is a new liveliness and movement in the angels clinging to the throne.
The gilded border of the Virgin’s dark blue robe flows down and across the
painting, following the contours of her body and suggesting that it covers a
living, three-dimensional figure, not just a painted representation.

Colour as well as line was significant in Duccio’s work. He used it to create a
harmonious scheme, rather than just to define the separate figures; and here
the variations in the angels’ robes &mdash; light blue and rose, green and pale
violet &mdash; make a glowing pattern. The Virgin was traditionally portrayed
in blue as it was an expensive pigment, and its use implied reverence and
respect; it also denoted purity since it is the colour of the sky and therefore
of heaven.  The figures are surrounded by a gilded frame decorated with
medallions of saints and prophets.

Above all, this devotional painting heralded a gradual new development in the
art of Siena. The beginnings of a new humanity and warmth pervade its grave and
austere beauty, and Duccio has conveyed deep religious feeling in a far more
accessible way than did the art of the Byzantine masters who preceded him.
