---
title: Théodore Géricault
lastmod: 2023-04-25
layout: artist
image: /images/art/gericault_1.jpg
born: 1791
died: 1824
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/gericault_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/gericault_1.jpg
    title: The Raft of the Medusa
    width: 1465
    height: 1000
  - image: /images/art/gericault_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/gericault_2.jpg
    title: Officer of the Hussars
    width: 1122
    height: 1463
  - image: /images/art/gericault_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/gericault_3.jpg
    title: The Insane Woman
    width: 1202
    height: 1465
---

Géricault was born in Rouen, the son of wealthy parents, and unlike the
majority of artists he had a measure of financial independence all his life. He
was fanatically interested in horses, both as a painter and as a reckless
rider, and his tragic death at the age of thirty-two was hastened by the
after-effects of riding accidents. But in about twelve years he produced enough
work to leave a substantial legacy of paintings when he died.

He trained in the studios of two French painters, Carle Vernet and Guerin, but
[Rubens](/art/rubens), [Michelangelo](/art/michelangelo),
[Caravaggio](/art/caravaggio) and the Venetian painters were perhaps the
strongest influences on his work. He developed a superb flair for composition
and a dramatic style that are clearly displayed in _The Raft of the Medusa_.

In 1816 a French military transport frigate, the _Medusa_, laden with settlers
and soldiers for Senegal, had been wrecked off the coast of West Africa. The
incident caused a scandal at the time because of the captain’s ineptitude, the
lack of lifeboats, and the number of people drowned as a result. A hundred and
fifty passengers and crew were crammed on to a makeshift raft, but two weeks
later only fifteen of them were alive to tell the tale.

[![The Raft of the Medusa](/images/art/gericault_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/gericault_1.jpg){:.popup}
Géricault worked for over a year on the huge painting, some sixteen feet high
and over eighteen feet wide, in a special studio hired for the purpose. He
launched a raft into the sea to see how it would work; he interviewed
survivors; and he visited hospitals and morgues to make studies of the ill, the
dying and the dead.

He chose to illustrate the moment when some of the survivors first glimpsed
their rescue ship, the _Argos_, on the horizon, but it vanished from sight,
although later returned to pick them up. Some of the raft’s passengers were
seized with excitement and tried desperately to attract the ship’s attention,
but others, if they were not already dead, were sunk in desolation and too weak
to move. The subdued colours are sombre and expressive of the horror of the
whole event. The sharply contrasting light and shade on the figures is a clear
indication of the influence of [Caravaggio](/art/caravaggio), and their bodies
are wonderfully taut and muscular, like those of
[Michelangelo](/art/michelangelo).

The composition is based on the tension between two diagonals: the raft itself
and the movement of the figures take the eye inwards from the left, while the
ropes and the mast, with its billowing sail, strain back to hold the structural
balance.

[![The Insane Woman](/images/art/gericault_3.jpg){:.image .left}](/images/art/gericault_3.jpg){:.popup}
Géricault’s ambition was ‘to shine, to illuminate, to astonish the world’, but
_The Raft of the Medusa_ was considered by some as an attack on a government
which had allowed inefficiency to lead to tragedy, and it was given a
lukewarm reception when it was first shown in Paris in 1819. Now, however, it
is appreciated as an outstanding work of the French Romantic movement,
brilliantly constructed and intensely powerful.

This painting is variously titled _The Mad Woman_, _The Insane Woman_, _The
Monomania of Envy_ and _The Hyena of the Salpêtrière_. Whilst in England,
Géricault made studies of the poverty and misery to be found on the streets of
London. In the same vein, on his return to Paris, he visited La Salpêtrière, an
insane asylum, where he made portraits of the inmates in a compassionate
attempt to capture and understand the image of mental illness.
