---
title: Giorgione
born: 1477
died: 1510
lastmod: 2023-07-04
image: /images/art/giorgione_1.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_1.jpg
    width: 825
    height: 1800
    title: Judith
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_2.jpg
    width: 702
    height: 956
    title: Portrait of a Young Man
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_3.jpg
    width: 800
    height: 913
    title: The Tempest
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_4.jpg
    width: 1618
    height: 1962
    title: Laura
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_5.jpg
    width: 1928
    height: 1640
    title: The Three Philosophers
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_6.jpg
    width: 1352
    height: 1862
    title: Castelfranco Madonna
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_7.jpg
    width: 1838
    height: 1133
    title: Sleeping Venus
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_8.jpg
    width: 1970
    height: 1586
    title: Pastoral Concert
  - image: /images/art/giorgione_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giorgione_9.jpg
    width: 1588
    height: 1834
    title: The Old Woman
---

Giorgione, born in Castelfranco, some twenty-five miles from Venice, is one of
Europe’s greatest painters, yet practically nothing is known about him. It is
thought that he worked with or was apprenticed to Giovanni Bellini in Venice,
that in Bellini’s studio he met the young Titian, and that
[Titian](/art/titian/) in his turn became Giorgione’s pupil.

He died of the plague in his early thirties, and some of his paintings may have
been finished by other artists after his death. This has added to the
considerable problem of deciding which works are entirely authentic and which
are not.

As a result of his remarkable talent, and the fact that information about his
life was invented because so little was known, a legend has grown up around him
in which he has become a mysterious and almost mythical figure.

Portraits, religious scenes and landscapes were the themes of Giorgione’s small
oil paintings, and he was the first artist in Venice to produce work for
collectors rather than for churches or public buildings. Like The Tempest ,
many of his pictures do not represent a real or even mythological scene in the
way that most paintings had done in the past.  Giorgione was ahead of his time
in that his work was created to express a mood or an idea, much as modern art
does today, and this had a profound effect on his Ventian contemporaries and
the painters who followed him.

[![The Tempest](/images/art/giorgione_3.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/giorgione_3.jpg){:.popup}
The Tempest is one of the very few paintings &mdash; about thirteen in all
&mdash; that have always unanimously been attributed to Giorgione, but its
subject has been disputed for over four centuries. X-rays have revealed that
Giorgione first painted another female nude where the man now is, which
indicates that he had no intention of illustrating a particular event, but was
allowing his imagination entirely to guide him.

The scene is lit by the strange golden light of an approaching storm, and a
streak of lightning pierces the heavy thunderclouds. On a grassy bank a plump
young woman, naked but for a length of white cloth draped around her shoulders,
cradles a baby to her breast, and a shepherd passing by stops to look at them
from the water’s edge. The overwhelming, elemental force of Nature, and the
part man plays in the cycle of life are implied by the storm and the figures in
the landscape, and evidence of man’s creation of the civilized world is
provided by the buildings along the river bank. In the distance are the dome of
a church and the sunlit walls of battlemented palaces (on the roof of one a
stork or heron is outlined against the sky). Behind the young man are the ruins
of ancient buildings overgrown with trees, indicating perpetual change and the
passing of time.

Giorgione has used intense colour and light to bind the composition together,
and to pick out details of architecture, distant trees, the planks of the
bridge, the shining foliage of bushes behind the two figures, and the beautiful
naked flesh of the woman and her child. And he has reproduced superbly in this
mysterious, emotional landscape the eerie light of a summer storm, and the
electric tension it creates in the atmosphere.
