---
title: Giotto di Bondone
born: 1266
died: 1337
lastmod: 2023-07-01
image: /images/art/giotto_4.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/giotto_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giotto_1.jpg
    width: 890
    height: 1001
    title: Legend of St. Francis Fresco
  - image: /images/art/giotto_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giotto_2.jpg
    width: 1241
    height: 1885
    title: The Crucifixion of Rimini
  - image: /images/art/giotto_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giotto_3.jpg
    width: 2023
    height: 1972
    title: Kiss of Judas
  - image: /images/art/giotto_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giotto_4.jpg
    width: 2048
    height: 1926
    title: Lamentation (The Mourning of Christ)
  - image: /images/art/giotto_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/giotto_5.jpg
    width: 1234
    height: 1963
    title: Ognissanti Madonna
---

Giotto was to Florentine painting what [Duccio](/art/duccio/) was to that of
Siena &mdash; a pathfinder &mdash; and his work had a far-reaching effect.  He
moved away entirely from stylized formality, and gave his figures a greater
degree of solidity and movement than had been seen before in Western art. His
work represents a breakthrough in the way it expressed human emotion with
imagination and understanding. He applied to his religious paintings a close
observation of the world around him, so that they are believable and relate
closely to life.

His success produced commissions in Padua, Naples, Milan and Rome, but most of
his life was spent in his home town of Florence. Much of his work was done in
the technique known as fresco, a method of wall-painting in which water-based
pigment, similar to watercolour, was applied directly on to wet plaster. The
paint and plaster then fused together as they dried.  It was used most often in
the decoration of religious buildings in Italy.  The frescoes for the Arena
Chapel were commissioned by Enrico Scrovegni, a member of a wealthy banking
family of Padua.

Giotto decorated the chapel with scenes from the lives of Joachim and Anna (the
parents of the Virgin Mary), the Virgin herself and Christ her son, which
together provide a powerful narrative of the lives of Christ’s family. Each
scene is set in a separate rectangular border, painted to resemble a mosaic, in
which are small insets depicting Old Testament stories.

[![The Lamentation (The Mourning of Christ)](/images/art/giotto_4.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/giotto_4.jpg){:.popup}
_The Lamentation_ is simple and dramatic in composition. A large outcrop of
rock leads sharply downwards from the right in a diagonal line, so that our
attention is focused on the group around the dead Christ. His body has been
taken down from the cross, and the figures of the Virgin, Joseph, Mary
Magdalene and some of the disciples cluster round in attitudes of grief.  Their
feelings are expressed in a new and lifelike repertoire of gestures. The Virgin
cradles her son on her lap, fiercely protective of him, and Mary Magdalene
holds his wounded feet.  A group of angels, materializing from the clouds, weep
and wring their hands in distraction. On the rock is the skeleton of a tree
symbolizing the Tree of Knowledge, which was said to have withered and died
when Adam fell from grace.

Separating us from a full view of Christ’s body are two cloaked and hooded
figures, their backs towards us. Compared with the stiffness of Byzantine art,
in which figures by tradition had faced the spectator, this was a remarkably
informal and realistic device. As a result of it we are drawn into the group,
as if we are looking over their shoulders and sharing their involvement in the
tragedy.  Giotto has depicted the event with great imagination, and conveys the
human reactions to it with a compassion that brings it alive.
