---
title: Frida Kahlo
lastmod: 2023-04-26
born: 1907
died: 1954
image: /images/art/kahlo_1.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_1.jpg
    width: 1200
    height: 1000
    title: The Two Fridas
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_2.jpg
    width: 600
    height: 720
    title: The Broken Column
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_3.jpg
    width: 940
    height: 726
    title: Henry Ford Hospital
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_4.jpg
    width: 778
    height: 1143
    title: Memory My Heart
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_5.jpg
    width: 800
    height: 1023
    title: What The Water Gave Me
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_6.jpg
    width: 848
    height: 1106
    title: Self-Portrait with Thorn Necklace and Hummingbird
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_7.jpg
    width: 1074
    height: 1589
    title: Fulang-Chang and I
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_8.jpg
    width: 1533
    height: 2000
    title: Self-Portrait dedicated to Leon Trotsky
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_9.jpg
    width: 976
    height: 1400
    title: Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair
  - image: /images/art/kahlo_a.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/kahlo_a.jpg
    width: 1000
    height: 879
    title: My Grandparents, My Parents and I
---

The Mexican artist and feminist icon was a performance artist of paint, using
the medium to lay bare her vulnerabilities while also constructing a persona of
herself as an embodiment of Mexico’s cultural heritage. Her most famous works
are the many surrealistic self-portraits in which she maintains a regal bearing
even as she casts herself as a martyr to personal and physical
suffering—anguishes rooted in a life of misfortunes that included contracting
polio as a child, suffering a catastrophic injury as a teenager, and enduring a
tumultuous marriage to fellow artist [Diego Rivera](/art/rivera).

She was born in Coyoacán in Mexico City and grew up at what was called “The
Blue House”, or La Casa Azul, which was her family home. Kahlo suffered
numerous hardships in her life, and the most notable was a bus accident in
1925, which left her with multiple broken bones and fractures and a punctured
uterus and abdomen.

She started painting after her accident, but she was always interested in art;
her father was a photographer, and Kahlo would assist in his studio as well as
learn drawing from Fernando Fernandez, who was a print-maker and friend of her
father’s. Kahlo produced numerous notable paintings throughout her career, all
inspired by her rich inner world as well as her passion for politics, activism,
and her heritage.

[![The Two Fridas](/images/art/kahlo_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/kahlo_1.jpg){:.popup}
_The Two Fridas_ was the first large-scale work done by Kahlo and is considered
one of her most notable paintings. It is a double self-portrait, depicting two
versions of Kahlo seated together. One is wearing a white European-style
Victorian dress while the other is wearing a traditional Tehuana dress.

Some art historians have suggested that the two figures in the painting are a
representation of Frida's dual heritage. Her father, Guillermo Kahlo, was
German; while her mother, Matilde Calderon, was Mexican.

Both Fridas show an open heart. The heart in the Mexican Frida is healthy
whereas the heart of the European Frida is open and cut. An interpretation of
this is that it not only shows two separate personalities but indicates the
constant pain that Frida is going through.

Although the two figures appear separate, a vein connecting the two further
symbolises that despite the differences in the two figures they both make up
one Frida; together they make the self-portrait.
