---
title: Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
born: 1864
died: 1901
image: /images/art/lautrec_1.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_1.jpg
    width: 1732
    height: 1520
    title: At the Moulin Rouge
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_2.jpg
    width: 1628
    height: 2036
    title: La toilette
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_3.jpg
    width: 1600
    height: 1282
    title: The Marble Polisher
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_4.jpg
    width: 1767
    height: 1343
    title: "At the Moulin Rouge, The Dance"
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_5.jpg
    width: 1799
    height: 2309
    title: The Laundress
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_6.jpg
    width: 1890
    height: 1457
    title: In Bed
  - image: /images/art/lautrec_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/lautrec_7.jpg
    width: 1600
    height: 1598
    title: Marcelle Lender Dancing the Bolero in Chilpéric
---

Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec was the son of a French aristocrat. As the result of
two accidents as a boy, in which he broke first one leg and then the other, he
was crippled for life: his legs never grew normally, and he became a grotesque
figure with the body of an adult and the legs of a child. He began to paint
during the periods of convalescence from his accidents, and went on to study
art in Paris. His physical disability had had a psychological effect on him
too, and he led a decadent life, seeking the company of people who would accept
him without discomfort. He mixed with singers, dancers and prostitutes,
entertainers of the music hall, the circus and the cabaret with whom he felt at
ease. These people and other artists formed the subject matter of his art.

He had an infallible eye for design, a gift for conveying movement and
atmosphere in a few rapid strokes, and he recorded what he saw without
implication of any kind.

[![At the Moulin Rouge](/images/art/lautrec_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/lautrec_1.jpg){:.popup}
_At the Moulin Rouge_ shows his world, unique and full of gossip. The Moulin
Rouge (where the can-can was made famous) was a music hall at the centre of
Bohemian life in Montmartre, and Toulouse-Lautrec, initially through the medium
of posters, made many of its stars immortal, and made his name as a painter.

The inhabitants of the room are arranged in an apparently accidental way, but
the painting is in fact made up of precise diagonals formed by the table, the
balustrade on the left and the planks on the floor. The brilliant hennaed hair
of the woman with her back to us is echoed throughout the composition, so that
colour as well as line unifies the picture; she also provides a striking focal
point.

In the foreground a woman stares out at us, her face mask-like under heavy
makeup. She is only partially visible, as if her movement has been caught as it
would be in a photograph. Lautrec’s friends sit drinking absinthe (a powerful
liqueur which was popular in their circle) and talking at the table in the
centre. Amongst them is the Spanish dancer La Macarona, her bright red lips in
a rather jaded smile.  The artist himself can be seen at the back, his top hat
barely reaching the shoulder of his cousin next to him; to the right a famous
dancer at the Moulin Rouge known as La Goulue (The Glutton) arranges her hair.

There is a feeling of continuous activity, as if the artist actually is part of
the scene he has painted, and the movement in the picture is going on all
around him.  Mirrors reflect the crowded, smoky, slightly out-of-focus haze of
the room, accentuating the life and the atmosphere of the place which Lautrec
has caught vividly.
