---
title: Michelangelo
layout: artist
image: /images/art/michelangelo_5.jpg
born: 1475
died: 1564
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_1_small.jpg
    title: The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel
    width: 3129
    height: 1125
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_2_small.jpg
    title: Separation of Light from Darkness
    width: 1555
    height: 1037
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_3_small.jpg
    title: Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants
    width: 1210
    height: 886
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_4_small.jpg
    title: Separation of Land and Water
    width: 1085
    height: 820
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_5_small.jpg
    title: Creation of Adam
    width: 1702
    height: 1137
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_6_small.jpg
    title: Creation of Eve
    width: 1101
    height: 810
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_7_small.jpg
    title: The Fall and Expulsion from Paradise
    width: 1726
    height: 1154
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_8_small.jpg
    title: Sacrifice of Noah
    width: 1149
    height: 770
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_9_small.jpg
    title: The Flood
    width: 1457
    height: 958
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_a.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_a_small.jpg
    title: Drunkenness of Noah
    width: 1148
    height: 800
  - image: /images/art/michelangelo_b.jpg
    small: /images/art/michelangelo_b_small.jpg
    title: Last Judgement
    width: 1197
    height: 1319
---

The phenomenal genius of Michelangelo has been praised consistently since the
start of his unparalleled career. He worked for princes and popes and was
pre-eminent in the High Renaissance as an architect, a sculptor and a painter.
More than anyone else, he raised the crafts of painting and sculpture to the
status of Fine Arts.

He was first apprenticed in the Florentine workshop of Domenico Ghirlandaio,
and shortly afterwards transferred to a school set up under the patronage of
Lorenzo de' Medici, who was known as _Il Magnifico_. After the death of Lorenzo,
Michelangelo went to Bologna and then to Rome, where he first made his name
with his _Pieta_ (a sculpture of the Virgin with the body of Christ after the
descent from the cross) in St Peter’s Cathedral. The Medici of Florence and the
Popes of Rome - Julius II, Leo X, Paul III - were his patrons, and he produced
work for them that won him public acclaim and adulation. Vasari tells us simply
that the work of Michelangelo ‘transcends and eclipses that of every other
artist, living or dead... supreme not in one art alone but in all three...’
Probably his greatest achievement, which can be seen in both sculptures and
paintings, was his extraordinary ability to express all the human emotions
through the beauty of the naked body.

[![The Creation of Adam](/images/art/michelangelo_5.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/michelangelo_5.jpg){:.popup}
The Sistine Chapel was built in the Vatican by Pope Sixtus IV (hence its name);
his nephew, who became Pope Julius II, commissioned the ceiling frescoes from
Michelangelo to complete its decoration (the walls already bore many famous
paintings by fifteenth-century Italian artists).

The chapel is 133 feet long, 43 feet wide, and 68 feet high, and it required a
brilliant imagination to devise a scheme in which the whole vast ceiling was
united.  Michelangelo achieved it through a series of narrative paintings which
tell the stories of Genesis until the Great Flood, and the stories of the life
of Christ from the Gospel of St Matthew. He was determined to carry out the
scheme virtually on his own, and, while Julius 11 agitated for its completion,
Michelangelo worked for nearly four years under appalling difficulties, most of
the time lying flat on his back on the scaffolding and unable to get a clear
view of what he was doing. There are nearly 350 figures in the ceiling as a
whole, in a wonderfully rich variety of poses which has been drawn on by
artists ever since.

_The Creation of Adam_ shows with extraordinary power and subtlety the moment
when the hand of God gave life to Adam, and symbolically to the human world.
The Creator’s flowing mantle encloses some eleven figures, angels or beings
that existed before man, and they support him as he stretches out his arm to
touch the finger of Adam. Reclining in a superbly graceful attitude, Adam’s
perfect, muscular body reveals his latent strength. The hands just touching
provide an emotional tension as well as a physical link between God and man.
The magnificent sculptural figures, dominating the spaces around them, express
in Michelangelo’s vast and dramatic conception the full significance of the
moment of creation.

At its unveiling the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel was hailed as a supreme work
of art, and it earned its artist the name _Il divino Michelangelo_.
