---
title: Claude Monet
layout: artist
image: /images/art/monet_1.jpg
born: 1840
died: 1926
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/monet_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_1.jpg
    title: Women in the Garden
    width: 1012
    height: 1245
  - image: /images/art/monet_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_2.jpg
    title: Impression, Sunrise
    width: 1443
    height: 1120
  - image: /images/art/monet_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_3.jpg
    title: Rouen Cathedral
    width: 559 
    height: 874 
  - image: /images/art/monet_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_4.jpg
    title: Houses of Parliament, London
    width: 1500
    height: 1312
  - image: /images/art/monet_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_8.jpg
    title: Water Lilies and Japanese Bridge
    width: 1992
    height: 1957
  - image: /images/art/monet_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_5.jpg
    title: Water Lilies
    width: 1235
    height: 619 
  - image: /images/art/monet_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_6.jpg
    title: Haystacks
    width: 1800
    height: 1067
  - image: /images/art/monet_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/monet_7.jpg
    title: Poplars on the Epte
    width: 1576
    height: 1553
---

It was from one of Claude Monet’s paintings - Impression , Sunrise - that the
Impressionist group, of which he was the leader, acquired its name.

He was born in Paris, but spent most of his working life on the Normandy coast
or in the French countryside, and he passionately loved the sea and the open
air. Poverty dogged him for many years, and the dreary problems of how to live
exasperated and depressed him. He was reduced to scrounging from his friends
and patrons just to survive, and frequently had to sacrifice finished work by
scraping off the paint in order to use the canvas again.

He spent the summer of 1866 at Ville d’Avray, near Paris, and it was there that
he painted _Women in the Garden_. He worked, as usual, out of doors, and had a
trench dug in the garden into which his huge canvas - about eight-and-a-half
feet by six-and-a-half feet - was lowered, and a pulley arrangement was rigged
up so that he could reach the top. Light interested him more than anything, and
he was concerned to reveal the fact that colour only exists in terms of light,
and that it changes in all the normal variations of daylight and shadow.

[![Women in the Garden](/images/art/monet_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/monet_1.jpg){:.popup}
The scene in the garden is a study of the effects of sunlight filtering through
leaves, casting dark shadows and dappling the figures of the four women (who
were all modelled by Monet’s mistress Camille).  Roses are in bloom, the trees
are dense with the dark green leaves of mid-summer, and the women wear pale
delicate dresses of embroidered cotton and fine muslin. The seated woman
shields her face from the sun with a parasol; and Monet has caught precisely
the effect of shade-on the colour of her skin and the top of her dress,
contrasting it with the bright reflected light on her skirt and the flowers
in her lap. The two women standing together are in the shade of a tree, with
the sun flickering through and forming patches of light on their dresses. The
fourth is in the full sun, its strong rays shining directly on to the back of
her dress and her gleaming red hair.  The long dark shadow in the foreground
accentuates the brilliance of the light, especially where it edges the white
skirts spread in a circle over the grass. The swirling movement of light summer
dresses makes an extremely romantic composition, and Monet’s understanding of
the effects of light bring out all its subtle variations of colour and
atmosphere.

He is generally considered to be the greatest of all the Impressionist
painters.  He had an astonishing ability to observe and record a scene with a
fresh eye, as free as possible from influences and conventions, and to paint
exactly what lay before him as if he were seeing for the first time.

In spite of his destitute state, he more than anyone stuck to the ideals of
Impressionism throughout his long life without deviating, and he was a great
source of stimulation to others in the group in the face of poverty and endless
criticism. Renoir said of him, ‘Without Monet, without my dear Monet who gave
us all courage, we would have given up.’ After about thirty years of struggle,
their work began to be understood and appreciated ; and finally it has come to
be valued as one of the most important movements, and certainly the most
popular, of the nineteenth century.
