---
title: Edvard Munch
image: /images/art/munch_1.jpg
born: 1863
died: 1944
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/munch_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/munch_1.jpg
    title: The Scream
    width: 1612
    height: 2000
  - image: /images/art/munch_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/munch_2.jpg
    title: Madonna
    width: 1436
    height: 1894
  - image: /images/art/munch_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/munch_3.jpg
    title: The Sick Child
    width: 1785
    height: 1800
---

_The Scream_ is one of the most disturbing and famous paintings of modern
times.  Munch’s mother died when he was only five, and his beloved sister
eleven years later, and these two tragic events in his early life affected his
psychological health.  Ill as a child, he had several nervous collapses as an
adult, and in 1908-9 was one of the first people to be treated with electric
shock therapy. He was outstandingly good-looking, drank far too much, never
married, and seems at times to have regarded women as devouring, destructive
creatures, in spite of or perhaps because of his extended love affairs.

[![The Scream](/images/art/munch_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/munch_1.jpg){:.popup}
Munch was an Expressionist painter: one who deliberately rejects fidelity to
nature, which the Impressionists had striven for, in favour of a simplified and
emphatic use of line and colour which carries great emotional impact. It was a
movement which took strongest hold in Germany and Northern Europe at the start
of this century, and Munch was one of its founders. The darkest recesses of his
emotional life were his subject. He said, ‘Art is the opposite of Nature. A
work of • art can only come from inside a person.  Art is the shape of the
picture fashioned through the nerves, heart, brain and eye of a man.’

Munch has left us an exact description of how he came to invent the image of
_The Scream_. He was taking a walk one evening, feeling tired and ill, and in
this mood observed the sun setting over the sea and the clouds burning
fiery-red. He was possessed by a consuming fear, and felt in the fibres of his
being a loud, unending scream piercing nature. The painting that resulted is
one of a cycle of pictures Munch called The Frieze of Life in which he revealed
his deepest feelings about life, love and death. Through them all runs the
undulating line of the shore and the waves of the sea.

The face is transfixed and frozen, contorted in a dreadful, anguished scream of
fear and pain, and the sunset a fiery blood-red, like the sunset that inspired
it.  The swirls of rough paint flow across the painting as though they are
about to engulf the foreground figure. Behind are two mysterious people:
perhaps they stand for approaching death. Man at the mercy of terrible forces
beyond his control, forces within himself maybe, is exposed in this strange,
powerful and unnerving painting.
