---
title: Pablo Picasso
born: 1881
died: 1973
lastmod: 2023-03-12
image: /images/art/picasso_8.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/picasso_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_1.jpg
    width: 1190
    height: 1838
    title: La Vie
  - image: /images/art/picasso_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_2.jpg
    width: 1394
    height: 1279
    title: Family of Saltimbanques
  - image: /images/art/picasso_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_3.jpg
    width: 1800
    height: 1864
    title: Les Demoiselles d'Avignon
  - image: /images/art/picasso_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_4.jpg
    width: 551
    height: 768
    title: Portrait of Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler
  - image: /images/art/picasso_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_5.jpg
    width: 1319
    height: 1663
    title: Girl before a Mirror
  - image: /images/art/picasso_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_6.jpg
    width: 1000
    height: 1300
    title: Le Rêve
  - image: /images/art/picasso_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_7.jpg
    width: 2667
    height: 1000
    title: Guernica
  - image: /images/art/picasso_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_8.jpg
    width: 1262
    height: 1536
    title: The Weeping Woman
  - image: /images/art/picasso_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_9.jpg
    width: 1909
    height: 1000
    title: Massacre in Korea
  - image: /images/art/picasso_a.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_a.jpg
    width: 1094
    height: 1642
    title: The Old Guitarist
  - image: /images/art/picasso_b.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/picasso_b.jpg
    width: 1110
    height: 827
    title: Las Meninas
---

The Spanish artist Pablo Picasso was probably the greatest artistic genius of
the twentieth century. He was first taught by his father, and showed
exceptional talent at an early age. He exhibited and won awards when still a
boy, and went on to study at the academies of Barcelona and Madrid. In 1900 he
visited Paris, and by 1904 had settled in France, where he spent the rest of
his life.

His early work is much concerned with poverty. His ‘Blue Period’ &mdash;
showing the squalor of the Paris streets &mdash; produced some of his most
famous pictures, and began his immense, lifelong success. His personal life was
complicated by a series of mistresses, wives and children whom he used as
subjects many times.

All Picasso’s work in any style &mdash; and there are many &mdash; is concerned
with his love of life, expressed through the eternal themes of birth, love,
death and war.

He was astoundingly productive in a variety of media and techniques : drawing,
sculpture, painting, print-making and ceramics. Over a score of volumes have
already been published simply cataloguing his work. He had two great strengths
beyond his remarkable technical expertise and outstanding energy: he could
assimilate with almost alarming ease the art of many other cultures and other
European artists, and combined this ability with his own imagination, verve and
wit to extend the scope of art. He participated in all the movements of his own
time, while remaining individual and becoming permanently identified with none.

[![Les Demoiselles d'Avignon](/images/art/picasso_3.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/picasso_3.jpg){:.popup}
_Les Demoiselles d’ Avignon_, started when Picasso was only twenty-five, began
a remarkable phase in his work. Artistic innovations do not come about in a
vacuum : Picasso drew on the influence of African sculpture and the work of
Cezanne and Matisse in this painting, and it is therefore a meeting place for
the traditions of primitive and contemporary art, disrupting both to create
something new and disturbing. The harsh angularity and distortion of the almost
naked figures, heralding the movement known as Cubism, are as disconcerting and
alarming now as they were for Picasso’s astonished fellow artists.

The title of the painting comes from a street in the red-light district of
Barcelona, and the five statuesque females are presumably prostitutes, their
gestures aping those of sexual invitation. Two women in the centre face towards
us but their noses are painted in profile; two others wear frightening masks,
one of them shown both full face and in profile although the woman has her back
to us. As became typical of Cubist paintings, the colours are flat and
unemphatic, limited to flesh tones and a muted background, with the result that
the firm, deliberate outlines dominate the painting. The five women are
simultaneously passive objects and aggressive predators, and the painting has a
mood of restlessness and violence, and a strange primitive energy. Its
influence has been vast, and it has become one of the most famous works of art
of this century.

[![The Weeping Woman](/images/art/picasso_8.jpg){:.image .left}](/images/art/picasso_8.jpg){:.popup}
The model for this intensely moving picture was surrealist photographer Dora
Maar (Theodora Markevich), Picasso's mistress and muse for seven years before a
stormy separation that left her broken and reclusive. Like other left-wing
sympathizers in 1937, the couple's eyes were on the civil war in Spain. Maar
photographed Picasso's creation of Guernica &mdash; the anti-war icon &mdash;
which was painted in a studio she hired in due des Grands-Augustins.
