---
title: Jackson Pollock
lastmod: 2023-04-28
born: 1912
died: 1956
image: /images/art/pollock_2.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/pollock_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_1.jpg
    title: Blue Poles (Number 11, 1952)
    width: 1920
    height: 861
  - image: /images/art/pollock_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_2.jpg
    title: Number 17A
    width: 1248
    height: 896
  - image: /images/art/pollock_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_3.jpg
    title: No. 5, 1948
    width: 1100
    height: 647
  - image: /images/art/pollock_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_4.jpg
    title: Mural on Indian Red Ground
    width: 650
    height: 366
  - image: /images/art/pollock_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_5.jpg
    title: Autumn Rhythm
    width: 1200
    height: 872
  - image: /images/art/pollock_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_6.jpg
    title: Convergence
    width: 1100
    height: 660
  - image: /images/art/pollock_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_7.jpg
    title: The Deep
    width: 609
    height: 910
  - image: /images/art/pollock_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/pollock_8.jpg
    width: 1646
    height: 2000
    title: Reflection of the Big Dipper
---


Jackson Pollock was born on a farm in Wyoming, and his childhood was spent in
Arizona and California. He studied art in Los Angeles and New York, and worked
for the Federal Arts Project, a government-funded programme for artists which
was part of President Roosevelt’s New Deal to combat the Depression. He was
killed in a car accident in his early forties, but he has left a legacy of over
a thousand paintings. His subjects were abstract, and he was the greatest
American exponent of Action Painting. Pollock underwent psychoanalysis, and his
pictures seem to involve a release of tensions, as if he is allowing things to
emerge from the depths of his subconscious.

His technique was unconventional : he spread a length of unprimed canvas on the
floor, instead of stretching it in the usual way, and tacked it to the boards.
He said, ‘On the floor I am more at ease. I feel nearer, more a part of the
painting, since this way I can walk round it, work from the four sides, and
literally be in the painting.’ He abandoned the use of brushes, and splashed or
poured the paint straight on to the cloth. He wanted nothing to come between
him and the colour itself. He felt that the painting had a life of its own, and
if things went well it would come through. ‘My painting is direct... I want to
express my feelings rather than illustrate them... When I am painting I have a
general notion as to what I am about. I can control the flow of paint: there is
no accident...  .’

[![Blue Poles](/images/art/pollock_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/pollock_1.jpg){:.popup}
The results are dramatic. _Blue Poles_, like many of his paintings, is very
large.  Skeins and streaks of brilliant colour weave a web in which one is
almost engulfed. There are no recognizable forms depicted, and the spectator is
free to interpret the result in whatever way he likes. It is different for each
person each time he looks at it; and this changeable quality adds to its energy
and vitality.

The purchase of _Blue Poles_ by Australia’s relatively new National Gallery was
controversial : the price of two million dollars was thought to be high. Yet
Pollock made a new and inventive contribution to modern art : he devised a
method of painting in which old conventions are set aside and new disciplines
imposed, and the result is spontaneous, stimulating and adventurous.
