---
title: Raphael (Raffaello Sanzio da Urbino)
layout: artist
image: /images/art/raphael_1.jpg
born: 1483
died: 1520
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/raphael_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/raphael_1_small.jpg
    title: The School of Athens
    width: 1910
    height: 1482
  - image: /images/art/raphael_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/raphael_2_small.jpg
    title: Sistine Madonna
    width: 1000
    height: 1371
  - image: /images/art/raphael_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/raphael_3_small.jpg
    title: Alba Madonna
    width: 962
    height: 1000
  - image: /images/art/raphael_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/raphael_4_small.jpg
    title: Transfiguration
    width: 1067
    height: 1608
  - image: /images/art/raphael_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/raphael_5_small.jpg
    title: The Wedding of the Virgin
    width: 1134
    height: 1626
---

So remarkable was Raphael’s talent that he became known as ‘the boy genius’;
his reputation grew rapidly, and his career throughout his short life seems to
have been effortless.

He was born and brought up in Urbino, an important provincial centre of art and
literature in the Italian province of the Marches. In 1504 he moved to
Florence, where he quickly absorbed all that the Florentine masters could teach
him. He was soon considered to be the equal of his two greatest Renaissance
contemporaries, Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, although they were both
somewhat older than him, and already well established.

In about 1508 he was summoned to Rome by Pope Julius 11, a great patron of the
arts. Raphael produced a large number of devotional pictures and altarpieces
for him and for his successor Pope Leo x, and he also painted portraits and
designed interiors for many other wealthy Romans.

![The Alba Madonna](/images/art/raphael_3.jpg){:.image .right}
_The Alba Madonna_ is so called because for over one hundred years it was in
the collection of the Spanish Dukes of Alba.  The painting is a tondo , a
circular format that was popular at the time, of the Madonna with the Christ
Child on her lap, seated serenely in the Italian country-side. The adoring
infant John the Baptist, clothed traditionally in animal skins, holds out a
cross of twigs to Christ. The Virgin Mary wears her customary blue cloak; the
haloes are fine wisps of gold.  The bright soft colours and delicate detail of
the draperies and hair, and the circle of wild flowers round the feet of the
three figures, make an unusually light and beautiful composition. It is
remarkable for its serenity and perfect calm, although the cross is a reminder
of the suffering to come. The figures are grouped to the left, but the Virgin’s
arm and the billowing material of her cloak create a restful balance, its
harmony emphasized by the shape of the painting.

_The Alba Madonna_ reveals Raphael’s genius in the solving of a difficult
problem : the convincing portrayal of three-dimensional figures on a flat
surface. It is interesting to compare this picture with the work of the very
early masters represented here, and to notice how dramatically painting had
changed by the time of Raphael, particularly in the representation of the human
figure. The woman and the two young children are not only three-dimensional,
they are entirely realistic in their movements and in the way they express
feeling in their faces and their gestures. This humanism and vitality was one
of the most significant features of High Renaissance Italian art.
