---
title: Rembrandt
layout: artist
image: /images/art/rembrandt_1.jpg
born: 1606
died: 1669
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_1_small.jpg
    title: Self-Portrait with Two Circles
    width: 1142
    height: 1376
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_2_small.jpg
    title: The Anatomy Lesson of Dr Nicolaes Tulp
    width: 1500
    height: 1130
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_3_small.jpg
    title: Belshazzar's Feast
    width: 1327
    height: 1057
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_4_small.jpg
    title: Night's Watch
    width: 2891
    height: 2422
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_5_small.jpg
    title: Bathsheba at Her Bath
    width: 1496
    height: 1500
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_6_small.jpg
    title: Syndics of the Drapers' Guild
    width: 1775
    height: 1200
  - image: /images/art/rembrandt_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/rembrandt_7_small.jpg
    title: The Hundred Guilder Print
    width: 1507
    height: 1094
---

Rembrandt ranks with the greatest artists of all time, outstandingly gifted as
a painter, a draughtsman and a print-maker. He was born in Leyden, Holland, the
son of a miller, and trained in Amsterdam. Holland at the time of Rembrandt had
recently emerged from the yoke of Spanish occupation, and the Golden Age of
Dutch painting reflected this new-found freedom. It had become a major
sea-power and its people were commercially successful and eager for
celebrations of the good life. Hundreds of artists were drawn to its cities and
made good livings.

In 1632 Rembrandt set up in Amsterdam as a portrait painter, and made his
name with a group portrait of the Amsterdam Guild of Surgeons. He soon acquired
scores of pupils and followers (at least fifty pupils are known by name).  Once
established, he refused to specialize, and his subject matter is immensely
varied. But he never strayed far from his central concern : human beings, their
spiritual aspirations and worldly realities.  He produced no sea paintings, but
there are landscapes, group portraits, religious, mythological and still life
pictures, scenes of contemporary life and domestic scenes.  He exploited to the
full the effects of chiaroscuro , and has been called the most dramatic painter
in history.

[![Self-Portrait with Two Circles](/images/art/rembrandt_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/rembrandt_1.jpg){:.popup}
Rembrandt produced a long series of self-portraits, which reveal every stage of
his life and career in an ever-deepening analysis. One of his first recorded
paintings contains a portrait of himself, and something like a hundred
self-portraits, both drawings and paintings, have survived. As a result of
living well beyond his means, he was bankrupted in 1656, but he kept a mirror
from the creditors so that he could continue to paint himself. In some of the
portraits he appears with a confident air in fancy dress, acting the part of a
swaggering young man, a romantic, or a man of substance and responsibility. But
later in his life he reveals increasingly his disillusionment, suffering,
doubts and need for reassurance. Taken together, the self-portraits are the
finest, broadest and most moving visual autobiography ever created.

This one was painted near the end of his life, and is probably the most famous.
He is in working clothes, with a white cloth round his head, and a thick warm
coat to keep the cold at bay in the studio.  The sombre colours show the
typical Rembrandt palette of browns and black, contrasted with flesh tones and
touches of white.

He holds his palette, a handful of brushes and a maulstick, a rigid slender rod
used by painters to keep hand and brush steady when carrying out detailed work.
The slant of the shoulders and spreading arms creates a wide pyramid shape,
which gives the figure a solid, rock-like quality. The face is heavily
furrowed, the skin patchy, and the bulbous nose is shown with no attempt at
disguising its prominence. The expression in the mouth and eyes shows a
lifetime’s experience. It is a remarkably self-penetrating study which reveals
his sensitivity and imagination as a man and as an artist.  Through capturing
an outward appearance accurately and completely, Rembrandt exposes the inner
landscape of the human character, and it is this understanding of humanity and
his skill in portraying it that sets his art so high.

[![The Night Watch](/images/art/rembrandt_4.jpg){:.image .left}](/images/art/rembrandt_4.jpg){:.popup}
Arguably the most well known among his works, _The Night Watch_ is one of the
most famous Dutch Golden Age paintings.

The painting is famous for three things:
- its colossal size (363 by 437 centimetres (12 by 14+1⁄2 feet)),
- the dramatic use of light and shadow (tenebrism), and
- the perception of motion in what would have traditionally been a static military group portrait.

The painting was completed in 1642, at the peak of the Dutch Golden Age. It
depicts the eponymous company moving out, led by their Captain (dressed in
black, with a red sash) and his lieutenant (dressed in yellow, with a white
sash). With effective use of sunlight and shade, Rembrandt leads the eye to the
three most important characters among the crowd: the two men in the centre
(from whom the painting gets its original title), and the woman in the
centre-left background carrying a chicken. Behind them, the company's colours
are carried by the ensign. The figures are almost life-size. 
