---
title: Georges Seurat
layout: artist
image: /images/art/seurat_2.jpg
born: 1859
died: 1891
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/seurat_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/seurat_1_small.jpg
    title: Bathers at Asnières
    width: 2547
    height: 1690
  - image: /images/art/seurat_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/seurat_2_small.jpg
    title: A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte
    width: 1869
    height: 1258
---

Georges Seurat’s brief life included a short academic art training in Paris, a
year of military service, and a decade of intense work and artistic
investigation. He died when he was thirty-two, but by then he had produced a
handful of masterpieces which reveal his intelligent and rational approach to
the problems of colour and light. He wanted to be able to apply a scientific
system to the methods of the Impressionists, and he evolved a new technique
which came to be known as Pointillism, in which he applied the paint in small
dots of different colours which blend in the eye of the spectator rather than
on the canvas.

[![Bathers at Asnières](/images/art/seurat_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/seurat_1.jpg){:.popup}
Seurat combined several techniques in The Bathers as well as the features he
was fully to develop in his later work. His pointillist theory was not entirely
formed when he painted it, and he later added dots of colour in certain areas
to heighten their intensity, but the principles behind his colour analysis are
already evident.  His aim was to achieve the exact interplay of colour and
light in the open air, and, to this end, each area of shadow was broken down
into the complementary colours of the surrounding areas of light, and every
element in the painting - the grass, the water, the flesh tones - was made up
of colour reflected from the objects next to it.  There is something of the
Impressionist style in the brushwork and the effects of light; but Seurat
conveys not so much the light-heartedness to be found in their work but more
the dignity and solemnity of everyday life.

He was equally absorbed in the study of composition, and his major paintings
and small landscapes are the results of extremely careful preparation. For The
Bathers he made no less than fourteen small paintings and ten drawings before
putting together this formal and precise composition. It now seems as if the
arrangement was inevitable: the placing of the figures, the spaces between
them, and even the points of colour on each fine blade of grass are essential
parts of the carefully calculated scheme.

Seurat’s early work was received with consternation and criticism, but for the
last five years of his life he found himself the centre of a cult, and his
effect on modern art has been considerable.
