---
title: Joseph Mallord William Turner
lastmod: 2023-05-07
born: 1775
died: 1851
image: /images/art/turner_2.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/turner_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_1.jpg
    title: The Fighting Temeraire
    width: 1705
    height: 1267
  - image: /images/art/turner_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_2.jpg
    title: Fishermen at Sea
    width: 1806
    height: 1342
  - image: /images/art/turner_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_3.jpg
    title: Fire at Sea
    width: 1536
    height: 1194
  - image: /images/art/turner_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_4.jpg
    title: The Slave Ship
    width: 2152
    height: 1616
  - image: /images/art/turner_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_5.jpg
    title: "Snow Storm: Hannibal and his Army Crossing the Alps"
    width: 1536
    height: 942
  - image: /images/art/turner_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_6.jpg
    title: The Burning of the Houses of Lords and Commons
    width: 1594
    height: 1186
  - image: /images/art/turner_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/turner_7.jpg
    title: Rain, Steam and Speed – The Great Western Railway
    width: 1594
    height: 1186
---

JMW Turner was one of the two outstanding geniuses of
British painting (the other was Constable). His characteristics even fit the
dictionary definition of genius: unusual capacity for imaginative creation,
intellectual power, unusual energy and precocity.

He was born and brought up in Covent Garden, London, where his father was a
barber and wig-maker. It was in London that he received his early training and
employment, and he spent most of his life there, yet he was to develop into the
most original landscape painter of the nineteenth century. By the age of
fourteen he had enrolled at the Royal Academy Schools, and a few years later he
was employed as a copyist, with a handful of other young artists, by a famous
connoisseur and collector Dr Munro. Turner explored Britain with great zeal,
and he went abroad to Venice, Switzerland, and notably to Paris where he saw
the Old Masters looted by Napoleon from all over Europe.

He was short, stout, an eccentric, and latterly a recluse. He was also
ambitious and outstandingly productive: sketchbooks, thousands of drawings and
water-colours (nearly 20,000 in the British Museum alone) and over five hundred
oil paintings survive. Almost his entire artistic life was devoted to landscape
painting in all its guises; formal and informal, seascapes, city scenes,
historical and architectural scenes of dazzling accuracy and fidelity to the
real world. In his book Liber Studiorum , landscape is categorized as
Historical, Mountainous, Marine and Architectural, not to mention Epic, Elegant
and Elevated Pastoral.  When dealing with real landscape (rather than
imaginary) he painted what he actually saw, and never added what he knew was
there but could not see.

[![The Fighting Temeraire](/images/art/turner_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/turner_1.jpg){:.popup}
The Temeraire was a warship of ninety-eight guns, launched in 1798 and active
at the Battle of Trafalgar; but by 1838 she was outmoded, her days of
employment over, and she was towed up the Thames to be broken up. Turner
witnessed this event, and his painting captured the imagination of critics and
public alike. It was generally thought that the picture connected the
Temeraire’s last journey to the waning of British sea power, symbolized by the
dying sun.  The painting has an enormous variety of texture: Turner used not
only conventional brushes and palette knife, but often his hands, paint rags
and the ends of his brushes.

The tall ship without her sails is ghostly and mysterious, and she is
shepherded up the river by a squat tug belching fiery steam from its funnel.
The whole scene is bathed in the colours of the brilliant sunset reflected in
the water, so that the stately warship and the tug seem to be part of the river
and the sky.  Shining translucent colours were Turner’s hallmark; he created
extraordinarily beautiful effects with colour and light so that his subjects
seem to melt almost magically into the atmosphere.
