---
title: Jan van Eyck
layout: artist
image: /images/art/vaneyck_1.jpg
born: 1390
died: 1441
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/vaneyck_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/vaneyck_1_small.jpg
    title: The Arnolfi Marriage
    width: 994
    height: 1360
  - image: /images/art/vaneyck_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/vaneyck_2_small.jpg
    title: Ghent Altarpiece
    width: 1566
    height: 1145
  - image: /images/art/vaneyck_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/vaneyck_3_small.jpg
    title: Madonna of Chancellor Rolin
    width: 1435
    height: 1507
  - image: /images/art/vaneyck_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/vaneyck_4_small.jpg
    title: Annunciation
    width: 646
    height: 1703
  - image: /images/art/vaneyck_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/vaneyck_5_small.jpg
    title: Madonna in the Church
    width: 1000
    height: 2078
---

In the fifteenth century the Belgian city of Bruges was one of the principal
artistic centres of Europe. It was a prosperous seaport until its river silted
up around 1500, and its wealthy merchants commissioned paintings to celebrate
themselves, their families and their success. Artists reached new, triumphant
heights hitherto unequalled in Europe, and Jan van Eyck was one of the most
remarkable of them all.

For a long time he was credited with the actual invention of oil painting, and
although this has been disproved, it is certain that he perfected a medium of
pigment, oil and varnish which has allowed his rich colour to survive almost
unchanged.

![The Arnolfi Marriage](/images/art/vaneyck_1.jpg){:.image .right}
The Arnolfini Marriage was probably the first double full-length contemporary
portrait in the North. It was painted for a merchant of Bruges, and it is
generally thought that the picture celebrates the marriage of Giovanni
Arnolfini, a silk merchant from Tuscany trading in the Netherlands, to Giovanna
Cenami. The artist was witness to the ceremony, and as proof the words
‘Johannes de Eyck fuit hie. 1434.’ (Jan van Eyck was here) are inscribed on the
wall above the mirror.

The room is lit by clear, cool daylight, and each object stands out with
crystal clarity on the highly finished surface of the painting, showing van
Eyck’s remarkable feeling for texture and the effects of light. It is no chance
collection of items: everything has a direct relevance to marriage, or to the
circumstances of this particular marriage. The house itself is substantially
built of brick, and the rich clothes of the couple, the hangings of the bed,
the Turkish carpet, the mirror on the wall, even the oranges which were hard to
obtain in the North, are all signs of their prosperity. The apple on the window
ledge may be used to symbolize the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge ; a single
candle, representing the Spirit of God, burns in the ornate brass chandelier;
the frame of the mirror contains ten scenes from the Passion of Christ, and
next to it hangs a rosary made of crystal or amber, reflecting the light. The
blue of the woman’s sleeves and underskirt may be used to denote purity (and it
is more likely that her voluminous dress was the fashion than that its folds
conceal her pregnancy, as has been suggested). On the wooden chair beyond the
canopied bed is the tiny carved figure of a saint, possibly St Margaret, the
patron saint of childbirth; and even the small dog at the woman’s feet is
recognized as a symbol of fidelity.

An informal atmosphere is created by the presence of the dog and the man’s
clogs lying askew on the floor, which adds to the astonishing realism of the
painting.  Van Eyck has defined the relationship of marriage in both worldly
and spiritual terms in this portrait, and reveals his extraordinarily
accomplished technique in its accuracy, clarity of colour and perception of the
realities of life.
