---
title: Vincent van Gogh
born: 1853
died: 1890
image: /images/art/vangogh_4.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_1_small.jpg
    width: 1290
    height: 1690
    title: Sunflowers
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_2_small.jpg
    width: 1500
    height: 1190
    title: Bedroom in Arles
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_3_small.jpg
    width: 2456
    height: 1168
    title: Wheatfield with Crows
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_4_small.jpg
    width: 2100
    height: 1663
    title: Starry Night
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_5_small.jpg
    width: 2126
    height: 1510
    title: The Potato Eaters
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_6_small.jpg
    width: 2075
    height: 1610
    title: The Yellow House
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_7_small.jpg
    width: 1732
    height: 1338
    title: Starry Night Over the Rhône
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_8_small.jpg
    width: 1241
    height: 1571
    title: "Still Life: Vase with Irises Against a Yellow Background"
  - image: /images/art/vangogh_9.jpg
    small: /images/art/vangogh_9_small.jpg
    width: 2105
    height: 1034
    title: Wheatfield Under Thunderclouds
---

Van Gogh was probably the greatest Dutch artist after Rembrandt. He was a
bitterly unhappy and lonely man, and we know a good deal about his inner life
as a result of a massive, stirring and deeply moving autobiography in the form
of hundreds of letters written to his brother Theo. These described how his
paintings and drawings attempted to give shape to his feelings; they were cries
of anguish in his passionate and ultimately destructive search for
self-knowledge.

He was a man of deep religious belief, the son of a minister, and he was both
lay preacher and missionary in a coal-mining district of Belgium before he took
up painting. His character is full of contradictions: his dedication has
resulted in a large number of magnificent and important paintings and drawings;
yet he also abandoned himself to drink, despair, and the violent expression of
his personal feelings. He mutilated himself by cutting off his ear, and finally
committed suicide.

Most of his short life was spent in Holland, and his paintings of Dutch
peasants are characterized by heavy dark colour; but in 1886 he joined his
brother Theo in Paris, where he was influenced by the Impressionists and his
entire colour range broadened and lightened. In 1888 he moved to Arles in the
South of France, and his work became increasingly vivid and passionate as his
mental state deteriorated. He suffered from fits, and was eventually admitted
to an asylum at Saint-Remy. He was allowed freedom to paint, however, and in
his clear periods was still productive, but it was there in 1890 that he
eventually shot himself.

[![Starry Night](/images/art/vangogh_4.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/vangogh_4.jpg){:.popup}
In _Starry Night_ it is easy to see the turbulence of his unbalanced and
tormented personality behind the vibrant colour and fast and furious brushwork,
with its characteristic short strokes and swirls of paint. But the painting has
too the energy and vigour which were an essential part of van Gogh’s
temperament and art.

It is full of a sense of joy and understanding of the relationship between the
world we know on earth and the vast expanses of the universe. The cypresses,
familiar features in his landscapes, tower against the deep blue of the night
sky, with its sun and crescent moon and eleven stars whirling in space. There
are lights in all the village houses, and a church at the centre whose central
spire reaches up to the sky above the distant hills. The eleven stars are other
worlds continuing into infinity and dwarfing our own planet, yet the village
lights and the church link the earth with them, emphasizing that it is part of
the same immense creation. It is an intensely religious picture, painted with
an almost fanatical fervour, and its strength and energy are electrifying.
