---
title: Johannes Vermeer
lastmod: 2023-05-12
layout: artist
image: /images/art/vermeer_1.jpg
born: 1632
died: 1675
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_1.jpg
    title: The Girl with the Pearl Earring
    width: 1638
    height: 1918
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_2.jpg
    title: The Milkmaid (The Kitchen Maid)
    width: 1600
    height: 1794
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_3.jpg
    title: The Astronomer
    width: 1320
    height: 1500
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_4.jpg
    title: View of Delft
    width: 1800
    height: 1495
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_5.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_5.jpg
    width: 1596
    height: 1830
    title: The Lacemaker
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_6.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_6.jpg
    width: 1800
    height: 1659
    title: Diana and her Companions
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_7.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_7.jpg
    width: 1548
    height: 1924
    title: Saint Praxedis
  - image: /images/art/vermeer_8.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/vermeer_8.jpg
    width: 1560
    height: 1869
    title: Woman Reading A letter
---

On the basis of some thirty-six small surviving pictures, Vermeer is now
thought to be one of the greatest painters Northern Europe has ever produced.
He lived during the Golden Age of Dutch painting, perhaps the most productive
period of painting there has ever been, yet on the evidence available he seems
to have worked slowly, produced little, and not achieved spectacular fame in
his lifetime.  He was almost entirely overlooked until the 1 860s, when his
work was studied by French critic and art historian Theophile Thore, who
realized its genius.

Vermeer was born in Delft and spent his life there. In the tradition of Dutch
painting, most of his small pictures are concerned with domestic interiors, in
which everyday life is portrayed with a great feeling of intimacy. Everything
is bathed with light, for the play of light on domestic objects and
furnishings, and above all on people, fascinated Vermeer.  He used it to
brilliant effect in bringing out the depth and clarity of his colours.

Whereas other masters concentrated on official portraits, still life and scenes
from stories, Vermeer became one of the world’s greatest painters of women. He
captured them at private moments, writing letters or poised to play a musical
instrument, as though they were unobserved, and showed their strength and
vulnerability, straightforwardness and mystery.

[![The Girl with the Pearl Earring](/images/art/vermeer_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/vermeer_1.jpg){:.popup}
The identity of Vermeer’s models is uncertain, but he did have eleven children,
and it is thought that this may be one of his daughters. Her turban may be part
of the Turkish-style costumes, probably dressing-up clothes, which were among
the effects left by Vermeer on his death.  The girl is painted in an unusual
and arresting pose, as if she has turned to look at a companion, and the artist
has caught the movement of her head. She is very young and seems a little shy
and uncertain, yet her gaze is cool and steady.  Her wide dark eyes with their
opalescent whites, her slightly parted lips, and her creamy skin reflect the
strong light shining on her face. A large pearl gleams in her ear, a device
often used by Vermeer in his portraits of women as an additional source of
light, and her white collar heightens its effect.

She wears a beautiful turban of blue and gold, and the ends of it hang down her
back and balance the upward tilt of her head. The extraordinarily luminous
colours of the turban and the girl’s pale skin are accentuated by the deep
shadow of the background, which seems to recede and throw them into relief in
an almost mesmerizing way.

[![The Astronomer](/images/art/vermeer_3.jpg){:.image .left}](/images/art/vermeer_3.jpg){:.popup}
This painting reminds us that Vermeer lived in an age of scientific discovery.
He grew up in Delft with the inventor of the microscope, van Leeuwenboek, who
after Vermeer's death, became trustee for his estate. The astronomer's globe
was made by Hondius in 1600. It sits on a table draped with an exotic cloth and
the astronomer wears a flowing gown, as if the scholarly scientific future has
still to contend with the superstitious past.

Vermeer was one of the greatest masters of light and colour there has ever
been, and his small calm paintings shine with a wonderful intensity.
