---
title: James Abbott McNeill Whistler
lastmod: 2023-05-07
born: 1834
died: 1903
image: /images/art/whistler_1.jpg
gallery:
  - image: /images/art/whistler_1.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/whistler_1.jpg
    width: 1769
    height: 1574
    title: Arrangement in Grey and Black No.1 (Whistler's Mother)
  - image: /images/art/whistler_2.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/whistler_2.jpg
    width: 1218
    height: 1620
    title: Nocturne in Black and Gold – The Falling Rocket
  - image: /images/art/whistler_3.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/whistler_3.jpg
    width: 1124
    height: 1485
    title: "Nocturne: Blue and Gold - Old Battersea Bridge"
  - image: /images/art/whistler_4.jpg
    small: /images/art/small/whistler_4.jpg
    width: 840
    height: 1024
    title: "Arrangement in Grey and Black, No. 2: Portrait of Thomas Carlyle"
---

Whistler was born in America and spent much of his life in England, and both
countries claim him as their own; yet he belongs as much to France, where he
studied art and became friends with most of the great painters of his day. He
was always a controversial figure, the centre of public quarrels and a libel
case; and he was also a dandy with a biting wit, who could outdo even his
friend Oscar Wilde in verbal repartee.

[![Arrangement in Grey and Black No.1 (Whistler's Mother)](/images/art/whistler_1.jpg){:.image .right}](/images/art/whistler_1.jpg){:.popup}
Whistler was a master etcher, and was more interested in the formation of
shapes and colours on a canvas than in subject matter. Art for art’s sake was
his motto, and his portraits of women, domestic interiors and views of water
are vehicles for the creation of perfect compositions, each one made up of
delicate gradations of tone.

This portrait of his mother, to whom he was deeply attached, is intensely
personal and full of character and atmosphere. She is seen in profile, her grey
hair rather severely dressed and her hands folded in her lap. The effect is
dignified and a little austere, but alleviated by the delicate lace at her neck
and trimming her sleeves and cap.

As its title states, the painting is primarily ‘an arrangement’ of colours, and
its most arresting feature is the way in which areas of subtle colour have been
weighed against each other. The woman’s dress is a bold expanse of black,
balanced by the dark vertical mass of the curtain and the frame of another
Whistler painting on the wall ; and these dark shapes are offset by precisely
calculated areas of grey and white. It is a sensitive and beautifully
constructed composition of blocks of muted colour, in which any change in
emphasis would upset the delicate balance.
