---
title: To a Skylark
poem: true
author: Shelley, Percy Bysshe
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Hail to thee, blithe Spirit!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Bird thou never wert,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; That from Heaven, or near it,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Pourest thy full heart  
In profuse strains of unpremeditated art.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Higher still and higher  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; From the earth thou springest  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a cloud of fire;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; The blue deep thou wingest,  
And singing still dost soar, and soaring ever singest.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; In the golden lightning  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Of the sunken sun  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; O'er which clouds are bright'ning,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Thou dost float and run,  
Like an unbodied joy whose race is just begun.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The pale purple even  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Melts around thy flight;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a star of Heaven  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In the broad daylight  
Thou art unseen, but yet I hear thy shrill delight:  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Keen as are the arrows  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Of that silver sphere,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Whose intense lamp narrows  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In the white dawn clear  
Until we hardly see--we feel that it is there.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; All the earth and air  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; With thy voice is loud.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; As, when night is bare,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; From one lonely cloud  
The moon rains out her beams, and heaven is overflowed.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; What thou art we know not;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; What is most like thee?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; From rainbow clouds there flow not  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Drops so bright to see  
As from thy presence showers a rain of melody.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a poet hidden  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In the light of thought,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Singing hymns unbidden,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Till the world is wrought  
To sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not:  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a high-born maiden  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In a palace tower,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Soothing her love-laden  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Soul in secret hour  
With music sweet as love, which overflows her bower:  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a glow-worm golden  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In a dell of dew,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Scattering unbeholden  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Its aerial hue  
Among the flowers and grass, which screen it from the view:  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like a rose embowered  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; In its own green leaves,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; By warm winds deflowered,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Till the scent it gives  
Makes faint with too much sweet these heavy-winged thieves.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Sound of vernal showers  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; On the twinkling grass,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Rain-awakened flowers,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; All that ever was  
Joyous, and clear, and fresh, thy music doth surpass.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Teach us, sprite or bird,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; What sweet thoughts are thine:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; I have never heard  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Praise of love or wine  
That panted forth a flood of rapture so divine.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Chorus hymeneal  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Or triumphal chaunt  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Matched with thine, would be all  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; But an empty vaunt--  
A thing wherein we feel there is some hidden want.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; What objects are the fountains  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Of thy happy strain?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; What fields, or waves, or mountains?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; What shapes of sky or plain?  
What love of thine own kind? what ignorance of pain?  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; With thy clear keen joyance  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Languor cannot be:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Shadow of annoyance  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Never came near thee:  
Thou lovest, but ne'er knew love's sad satiety.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Waking or asleep,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Thou of death must deem  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Things more true and deep  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Than we mortals dream,  
Or how could thy notes flow in such a crystal stream?  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; We look before and after,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; And pine for what is not:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Our sincerest laughter  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; With some pain is fraught;  
Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Yet if we could scorn  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Hate, and pride, and fear;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; If we were things born  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Not to shed a tear,  
I know not how thy joy we ever should come near.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Better than all measures  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Of delightful sound,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Better than all treasures  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; That in books are found,  
Thy skill to poet were, thou scorner of the ground!  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Teach me half the gladness  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; That thy brain must know,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Such harmonious madness  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; From my lips would flow  
The world should listen then, as I am listening now!<br />

