---
title: Night of the Scorpion
lastmod: 2014-12-13
author: Ezekiel, Nissim
---
I remember the night my mother  
was stung by a scorpion. Ten hours  
of steady rain had driven him  
to crawl beneath a sack of rice.  
Parting with his poison - flash  
of diabolic tail in the dark room -  
he risked the rain again.  
The peasants came like swarms of flies  
and buzzed the name of God a hundred times  
to paralyse the Evil One.  
With candles and with lanterns  
throwing giant scorpion shadows  
on the mud-baked walls  
they searched for him: he was not found.  
They clicked their tongues.  
With every movement that the scorpion made  
his poison moved in Mother's blood, they said.  
May he sit still, they said.  
May the sins of your previous birth  
be burned away tonight, they said.  
May your suffering decrease  
the misfortunes of your next birth, they said.  
May the sum of all evil  
balanced in this unreal world  
against the sum of good  
become diminished by your pain.  
May the poison purify your flesh  
of desire, and your spirit of ambition,  
they said, and they sat around  
on the floor with my mother in the centre,  
the peace of understanding on each face.  

More candles, more lanterns, more neighbours,  
more insects, and the endless rain.  
My mother twisted through and through,  
groaning on a mat.  
My father, sceptic, rationalist,  
trying every curse and blessing,  
powder, mixture, herb and hybrid.  
He even poured a little paraffin  
upon the bitten toe and put a match to it.  
I watched the flame feeding on my mother.  
I watched the holy man perform his rites  
to tame the poison with an incantation.  
After twenty hours  
it lost its sting.  

My mother only said  
Thank God the scorpion picked on me  
And spared my children.<br />

