---
title: The Village Blacksmith
poem: true
author: Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth
---
Under a spreading chestnut-tree  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The village smithy stands;   
The smith, a mighty man is he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; With large and sinewy hands;   
And the muscles of his brawny arms  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Are strong as iron bands.  

His hair is crisp, and black, and long,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; His face is like the tan;   
His brow is wet with honest sweat,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; He earns whate'er he can,   
And looks the whole world in the face,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; For he owes not any man.  

Week in, week out, from morn till night,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; You can hear his bellows blow;   
You can hear him swing his heavy sledge,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; With measured beat and slow,   
Like a sexton ringing the village bell,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; When the evening sun is low.  

And children coming home from school  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Look in at the open door;   
They love to see the flaming forge,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And hear the bellows roar,   
And catch the burning sparks that fly  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Like chaff from a threshing-floor.  

He goes on Sunday to the church,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And sits among his boys;   
He hears the parson pray and preach,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; He hears his daughter's voice,   
Singing in the village choir,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And it makes his heart rejoice.  

It sounds to him like her mother's voice,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Singing in Paradise!   
He needs must think of her once more,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; How in the grave she lies;   
And with his hard, rough hand he wipes  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A tear out of his eyes.  

Toiling,---rejoicing,---sorrowing,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Onward through life he goes;   
Each morning sees some task begin,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Each evening sees it close;   
Something attempted, something done,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Has earned a night's repose.  

Thanks, thanks to thee, my worthy friend,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; For the lesson thou hast taught!   
Thus at the flaming forge of life  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Our fortunes must be wrought;   
Thus on its sounding anvil shaped  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Each burning deed and thought.

