---
title: Miss Gee
poem: true
layout: page
author: Auden, W.H.
---
Let me tell you a little story  
&nbsp; About Miss Edith Gee;  
She lived in Clevedon Terrace  
&nbsp; At number 83.  

She'd a slight squint in her left eye,  
&nbsp; Her lips they were thin and small,  
She had narrow sloping shoulders  
&nbsp; And she had no bust at all.  

She'd a velvet hat with trimmings,  
&nbsp; And a dark grey serge costume;  
She lived in Clevedon Terrace  
&nbsp; In a small bed-sitting room.  

She'd a purple mac for wet days,  
&nbsp; A green umbrella too to take,  
She'd a bicycle with shopping basket  
&nbsp; And a harsh back-pedal break.  

The Church of Saint Aloysius  
&nbsp; Was not so very far;  
She did a lot of knitting,  
&nbsp; Knitting for the Church Bazaar.  

Miss Gee looked up at the starlight  
&nbsp; And said, 'Does anyone care  
That I live on Clevedon Terrace  
&nbsp; On one hundred pounds a year?'  

She dreamed a dream one evening  
&nbsp; That she was the Queen of France  
And the Vicar of Saint Aloysius  
&nbsp; Asked Her Majesty to dance.  

But a storm blew down the palace,  
&nbsp; She was biking through a field of corn,  
And a bull with the face of the Vicar  
&nbsp; Was charging with lowered horn.  

She could feel his hot breath behind her,  
&nbsp; He was going to overtake;  
And the bicycle went slower and slower  
&nbsp; Because of that back-pedal break.  

Summer made the trees a picture,  
&nbsp; Winter made them a wreck;  
She bicycled to the evening service  
&nbsp; With her clothes buttoned up to her neck.  

She passed by the loving couples,  
&nbsp; She turned her head away;  
She passed by the loving couples,  
&nbsp; And they didn't ask her to stay.  

Miss Gee sat in the side-aisle,  
&nbsp; She heard the organ play;  
And the choir sang so sweetly  
&nbsp; At the ending of the day,  

Miss Gee knelt down in the side-aisle,  
&nbsp; She knelt down on her knees;  
'Lead me not into temptation  
&nbsp; But make me a good girl, please.'  

The days and nights went by her  
&nbsp; Like waves round a Cornish wreck;  
She bicycled down to the doctor  
&nbsp; With her clothes buttoned up to her neck.  

She bicycled down to the doctor,  
&nbsp;And rang the surgery bell;  
'O, doctor, I've a pain inside me,  
&nbsp; And I don't feel very well.'  

Doctor Thomas looked her over,  
&nbsp; And then he looked some more;  
Walked over to his wash-basin,  
&nbsp;Said,'Why didn't you come before?'  

Doctor Thomas sat over his dinner,  
&nbsp; Though his wife was waiting to ring,  
Rolling his bread into pellets;  
&nbsp; Said, 'Cancer's a funny thing.  

'Nobody knows what the cause is,  
&nbsp; Though some pretend they do;  
It's like some hidden assassin  
&nbsp; Waiting to strike at you.  

'Childless women get it.  
&nbsp; And men when they retire;  
It's as if there had to be some outlet  
&nbsp; For their foiled creative fire.'  

His wife she rang for the servent,  
&nbsp; Said, 'Dont be so morbid, dear';  
He said: 'I saw Miss Gee this evening  
&nbsp; And she's a goner, I fear.'  

They took Miss Gee to the hospital,  
&nbsp; She lay there a total wreck,  
Lay in the ward for women  
&nbsp; With her bedclothes right up to her neck.  

They lay her on the table,  
&nbsp; The students began to laugh;  
And Mr. Rose the surgeon  
&nbsp; He cut Miss Gee in half.  

Mr. Rose he turned to his students,  
&nbsp; Said, 'Gentlemen if you please,  
We seldom see a sarcoma  
&nbsp; As far advanced as this.'  

They took her off the table,  
&nbsp; They wheeled away Miss Gee  
Down to another department  
&nbsp; Where they study Anatomy.  

They hung her from the ceiling  
&nbsp; Yes, they hung up Miss Gee;  
And a couple of Oxford Groupers  
&nbsp; Carefully dissected her knee.

