---
title: The Battle of Blenheim
poem: true
layout: page
author: Southey, Robert
---
&nbsp;It was a summer evening,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Old Kaspar's work was done,  
&nbsp;And he before his cottage door  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Was sitting in the sun,  
&nbsp;And by him sported on the green  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; His little grandchild Wilhelmine.  

&nbsp;&nbsp; She saw her brother Peterkin  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Roll something large and round,  
&nbsp;Which he beside the rivulet  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; In playing there had found;  
He came to ask what he had found,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; That was so large, and smooth, and round.  

&nbsp; Old Kaspar took it from the boy,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Who stood expectant by;  
And then the old man shook his head,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And, with a natural sigh,  
&quot;'Tis some poor fellow's skull,&quot; said he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;Who fell in the great victory.  

&nbsp; &quot;I find them in the garden,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; For there's many here about;  
And often when I go to plough,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The ploughshare turns them out!  
For many thousand men,&quot; said he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;Were slain in that great victory.&quot;  

&nbsp; &quot;Now tell us what 'twas all about,&quot;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Young Peterkin, he cries;  
And little Wilhelmine looks up  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; With wonder-waiting eyes;  
&quot;Now tell us all about the war,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And what they fought each other for.&quot;  

&nbsp; &quot;It was the English,&quot; Kaspar cried,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;Who put the French to rout;  
But what they fought each other for,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; I could not well make out;  
But everybody said,&quot; quoth he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;That 'twas a famous victory.  

&nbsp; &quot;My father lived at Blenheim then,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Yon little stream hard by;  
They burnt his dwelling to the ground,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And he was forced to fly;  
So with his wife and child he fled,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Nor had he where to rest his head.  

&nbsp; &quot;With fire and sword the country round  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Was wasted far and wide,  
And many a childing mother then,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And new-born baby died;  
But things like that, you know, must be  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; At every famous victory.  

&nbsp; &quot;They say it was a shocking sight  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; After the field was won;  
For many thousand bodies here  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Lay rotting in the sun;  
But things like that, you know, must be  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; After a famous victory.  

&nbsp; &quot;Great praise the Duke of Marlbro' won,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And our good Prince Eugene.&quot;  
&quot;Why, 'twas a very wicked thing!&quot;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Said little Wilhelmine.  
&quot;Nay... nay... my little girl,&quot; quoth he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;It was a famous victory.  

&nbsp; &quot;And everybody praised the Duke  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Who this great fight did win.&quot;  
&quot;But what good came of it at last?&quot;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Quoth little Peterkin.  
&quot;Why that I cannot tell,&quot; said he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &quot;But 'twas a famous victory.&quot;

