---
title: The Burial of Sir John Moore at Corunna
poem: true
author: Wolfe, Charles
---
&nbsp;Not a drum was heard, nor a funeral note,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; As his corse to the rampart we hurried;  
Not a soldier discharged his farewell shot  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; O'er the grave where our hero we buried.  

&nbsp; We buried him darkly at dead of night,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The sods with our bayonets turning;  
By the struggling moonbeam's misty light  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And the lanthorn dimly burning.  

&nbsp;&nbsp; No useless coffin enclosed his breast,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Nor in sheet nor in shroud we wound him;  
But he lay like a warrior taking his rest  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; With his martial cloak around him.  

&nbsp; Few and short were the prayers we said,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And we spoke not a word of sorrow;  
But we steadfastly gazed on the face that was dead,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And we bitterly thought of the morrow.  

&nbsp; We thought, as we hollowed his narrow bed  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And smoothed down his lonely pillow,  
That the foe and the stranger would tread o'er his head,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And we far away on the billow!  

&nbsp; Lightly they'll talk of the spirit that's gone  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; And o'er his cold ashes upbraid him,--  
But little he'll reck, if they let him sleep on  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; In the grave where a Briton has laid him.  

&nbsp; But half of our heavy task was done  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; When the clock struck the hour for retiring:  
And we heard the distant and random gun  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; That the foe was sullenly firing.  

&nbsp; Slowly and sadly we laid him down,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; From the field of his fame fresh and gory;  
We carved not a line, and we raised not a stone,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; But left him alone with his glory.<br />

