---
title: O Captain! My Captain!
lastmod: 2015-01-16
author: Whitman, Walt
---
O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done;  
The ship has weather'd every rack, the prize we sought is won;  
The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,  
While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; But O heart! heart! heart!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; O the bleeding drops of red,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Where on the deck my Captain lies,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Fallen cold and dead.  

O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;  
Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills;  
For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding;  
For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Here Captain! dear father!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; This arm beneath your head;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; It is some dream that on the deck,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; You've fallen cold and dead.  

My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still;  
My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will;  
The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done;  
From fearful trip, the victor ship, comes in with object won;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Exult, O shores, and ring, O bells!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; But I, with mournful tread,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Walk the deck my Captain lies,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Fallen cold and dead.

