---
title: The Patriot
poem: true
author: Nissim Ezekiel
---
I am standing for peace and non-violence.  
Why world is fighting fighting  
Why all people of world  
Are not following Mahatma Gandhi,  
I am simply not understanding.  
Ancient Indian Wisdom is 100% correct,  
I should say even 200% correct,  
But modern generation is neglecting-  
Too much going for fashion and foreign thing.  

Other day I'm reading newspaper  
(Every day I'm reading Times of India  
To improve my English Language)  
How one goonda fellow  
Threw stone at Indirabehn.  
Must be student unrest fellow, I am thinking.  
Friends, Romans, Countrymen, I am saying (to myself)  
Lend me the ears.  
Everything is coming -  
Regeneration, Remuneration, Contraception.  
Be patiently, brothers and sisters.  

You want one glass lassi?  
Very good for digestion.  
With little salt, lovely drink,  
Better than wine;  
Not that I am ever tasting the wine.  
I'm the total teetotaller, completely total,  
But I say  
Wine is for the drunkards only.  

What you think of prospects of world peace?  
Pakistan behaving like this,  
China behaving like that,  
It is making me really sad, I am telling you.  
Really, most harassing me.  
All men are brothers, no?  
In India also  
Gujaratis, Maharashtrians, Hindiwallahs  
All brothers -  
Though some are having funny habits.  
Still, you tolerate me,  
I tolerate you,  
One day Ram Rajya is surely coming.  

You are going?  
But you will visit again  
Any time, any day,  
I am not believing in ceremony  
Always I am enjoying your company.

