---
title: The Inchcape Rock
lastmod: 2015-02-02
author: Southey, Robert
---
No stir in the air, no stir in the sea,  
The Ship was still as she could be;  
Her sails from heaven received no motion,  
Her keel was steady in the ocean.  

Without either sign or sound of their shock,  
The waves flow&rsquo;d over the Inchcape Rock;  
So little they rose, so little they fell,  
They did not move the Inchcape Bell.  

The Abbot of Aberbrothok  
Had placed that bell on the Inchcape Rock;  
On a buoy in the storm it floated and swung,  
And over the waves its warning rung.  

When the Rock was hid by the surge&rsquo;s swell,  
The Mariners heard the warning Bell;  
And then they knew the perilous Rock,  
And blest the Abbot of Aberbrothok  

The Sun in the heaven was shining gay,  
All things were joyful on that day;  
The sea-birds scream&rsquo;d as they wheel&rsquo;d round,  
And there was joyaunce in their sound.  

The buoy of the Inchcpe Bell was seen  
A darker speck on the ocean green;  
Sir Ralph the Rover walk&rsquo;d his deck,  
And fix&rsquo;d his eye on the darker speck.  

He felt the cheering power of spring,  
It made him whistle, it made him sing;  
His heart was mirthful to excess,  
But the Rover&rsquo;s mirth was wickedness.  

His eye was on the Inchcape Float;  
Quoth he, &quot;My men, put out the boat,  
And row me to the Inchcape Rock,  
And I&rsquo;ll plague the Abbot of Aberbrothok.&quot;  

The boat is lower&rsquo;d, the boatmen row,  
And to the Inchcape Rock they go;  
Sir Ralph bent over from the boat,  
And he cut the bell from the Inchcape Float.  

Down sank the Bell with a gurgling sound,  
The bubbles rose and burst around;  
Quoth Sir Ralph, &quot;The next who comes to the Rock,  
Won&rsquo;t bless the Abbot of Aberbrothok.&quot;  

Sir ralph the Rover sail&rsquo;d away,  
He scour&rsquo;d the seas for many a day;  
And now grown rich with plunder&rsquo;d store,  
He steers his course for Scotland&rsquo;s shore.  

So thick a haze o&rsquo;erspreads the sky,  
They cannot see the sun on high;  
The wind hath blown a gale all day,  
At evening it hath died away.  

On the deck the Rover takes his stand,  
So dark it is they see no land.  
Quoth Sir Ralph, &quot;It will be lighter soon,  
For there is the dawn of the rising Moon.&quot;  

&quot;Canst hear,&quot; said one, &quot;the breakers roar?  
For methinks we should be near the shore.&quot;  
&quot;Now, where we are I cannot tell,  
But I wish we could hear the Inchcape Bell.&quot;  

They hear no sound, the swell is strong,  
Though the wind hath fallen they drift along;  
Till the vessel strikes with a shivering shock,  
&quot;Oh Christ! It is the Inchcape Rock!&quot;  

Sir Ralph the Rover tore his hair,  
He curst himself in his despair;  
The waves rush in on every side,  
The ship is sinking beneath the tide.  

But even is his dying fear,  
One dreadful sound could the Rover hear;  
A sound as if with the Inchcape Bell,  
The Devil below was ringing his knell.   

