---
title: The Slave's Dream
poem: true
layout: page
author: Longfellow, Henry Wadsworth
---
Beside the ungathered rice he lay,  
&nbsp; His sickle in his hand;  
His breast was bare, his matted hair  
&nbsp; Was buried in the sand.  
Again, in the mist and shadow of sleep,  
&nbsp; He saw his Native Land.  

Wide through the landscape of his dreams  
&nbsp; The lordly Niger flowed;  
Beneath the palm-trees on the plain  
&nbsp; Once more a king he strode;  
And heard the tinkling caravans  
&nbsp; Descend the mountain-road.  

He saw once more his dark-eyed queen  
&nbsp; Among her children stand;  
They clasped his neck, they kissed his cheeks,  
&nbsp; They held him by the hand!--  
A tear burst from the sleeper's lids  
&nbsp; And fell into the sand.  

And then at furious speed he rode  
&nbsp; Along the Niger's bank;  
His bridle-reins were golden chains,  
&nbsp; And, with a martial clank,  
At each leap he could feel his scabbard of steel  
&nbsp; Smiting his stallion's flank.  

Before him, like a blood-red flag,  
&nbsp; The bright flamingoes flew;  
&gt;From morn till night he followed their flight,  
&nbsp; O'er plains where the tamarind grew,  
Till he saw the roofs of Caffre huts,  
&nbsp; And the ocean rose to view.  

At night he heard the lion roar,  
&nbsp; And the hyena scream,  
And the river-horse, as he crushed the reeds  
&nbsp; Beside some hidden stream;  
And it passed, like a glorious roll of drums,  
&nbsp; Through the triumph of his dream.  

The forests, with their myriad tongues,  
&nbsp; Shouted of liberty;  
And the Blast of the Desert cried aloud,  
&nbsp; With a voice so wild and free,  
That he started in his sleep and smiled  
&nbsp; At their tempestuous glee.  

He did not feel the driver's whip,  
&nbsp; Nor the burning heat of day;  
For Death had illumined the Land of Sleep,  
&nbsp; And his lifeless body lay  
A worn-out fetter, that the soul  
&nbsp; Had broken and thrown away!

