---
title: The Sun Rising
poem: true
author: Donne, John
---
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Busy old fool, unruly Sun,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Why dost thou thus,  
Through windows, and through curtains, call on us?  
Must to thy motions lovers' seasons run?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Saucy pedantic wretch, go chide  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Late schoolboys, and sour prentices,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Go tell court-huntsmen that the king will ride,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Call country ants to harvest offices,  
Love, all alike, no season knows, nor clime,  
Nor hours, days, months, which are the rags of time.  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Thy beams, so reverend and strong  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Why shouldst thou think?  
I could eclipse and cloud them with a wink,  
But that I would not lose her sight so long:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; If her eyes have not blinded thine,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Look, and tomorrow late, tell me  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Whether both th' Indias of spice and mine  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Be where thou leftst them, or lie here with me.  
Ask for those kings whom thou saw'st yesterday,  
And thou shalt hear: &quot;All here in one bed lay.&quot;  

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; She is all states, and all princes I,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Nothing else is.  
Princes do but play us; compar'd to this,  
All honour's mimic, all wealth alchemy.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Thou, sun, art half as happy 's we,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; In that the world's contracted thus;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Thine age asks ease, and since thy duties be  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; To warm the world, that's done in warming us.  
Shine here to us, and thou art everywhere;  
This bed thy centre is, these walls, thy sphere.<br />

