---
title: Aurangzeb at his Father's Bier
author: Dutt, Hur Chunder
lastmod: 2023-05-09
---
  
The monarch lay upon his bier,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;Censers were burning low  
As through the lofty arches streamed  
&nbsp;&nbsp;the setting sun’s red glow,  
Still grasped he in his hand the blade  
&nbsp;&nbsp;which well fought fields had won  
And Aurangzeb beside him knelt;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;Usurper, proud and son.  
  
Remorse had stricken his false heart  
&nbsp;&nbsp;and quenched his wonted fire  
With gloomy brow and look intent  
&nbsp;&nbsp;he gazed upon his sire,  
  
Can tyrant death make _him_ afraid?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;hot tears burst from his eyes  
As thus his grief found vent in words  
&nbsp;&nbsp;to the warrior trains surprise  
  
“Father thou wert the goodliest king  
&nbsp;&nbsp;that e’er the sceptre swayed,  
How could I then lift up my hand  
&nbsp;&nbsp;against thee undismayed?  
How could I send thee here to pine,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;usurp the peacock throne  
O had I perished in the womb  
&nbsp;&nbsp;that deed were left undone.  
  
Look all is changed that was estranged  
&nbsp;&nbsp;awake my sire, my king,  
Look soldiers in their war array  
&nbsp;&nbsp;thy son in fetters bring,  
Thy rebel son who will abide  
&nbsp;&nbsp;thy word whate’er it be  
And fearless meet the rack or steel;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;rise up once more and see.  
  
Thou will not hear&mdash;thou will not speak;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;it is the last long sleep.&mdash;  
And am I not a king myself  
&nbsp;&nbsp;what mean these stirrings deep,  
O foolish eyes what means this rheum,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;I will not call them tears  
My heart which nothing e'er could daunt  
&nbsp;&nbsp;is faint with boding fears.  
  
The past appears! a checker'd field  
&nbsp;&nbsp;Of guilt and shame and war,  
What evil influence ruled my birth,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;What swart malignant star?  
Why did I barter peace of mind  
&nbsp;&nbsp;For royal pomp and state?  
Mad for the baleful meteor’s gleam  
&nbsp;&nbsp;With worldly joys elate  
  
Remembered voices speak my name  
&nbsp;&nbsp;and call me parricide  
The murdered Dara beckons me&mdash;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;he was thy joy and pride.  
And thus I fling the dear bought crown  
&nbsp;&nbsp;but whither can I fly?  
The awful thought still follows me  
&nbsp;&nbsp;that even kings will die."  
