---
title: The Diverting History of John Gilpin
author: Cowper, William
lastmod: 2023-05-09
---

John Gilpin was a citizen  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of credit and renown,  
A train-band captain eke was he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of famous London town.  
  
John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"Though wedded we have been  
These twice ten tedious years, yet we  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;No holiday have seen.  
  
"To-morrow is our wedding-day,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And we will then repair  
Unto the 'Bell' at Edmonton,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All in a chaise and pair.  
  
"My sister, and my sister's child,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Myself, and children three,  
Will fill the chaise; so you must ride  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On horseback after we."  
  
He soon replied, "I do admire  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of womankind but one,  
And you are she, my dearest dear,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Therefore it shall be done.  
  
"I am a linen-draper bold,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As all the world doth know,  
And my good friend the calender  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Will lend his horse to go."  
  
Quoth Mrs. Gilpin, "That's well said;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And for that wine is dear,  
We will be furnished with our own,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which is both bright and clear."  
  
John Gilpin kissed his loving wife.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;O'erjoyed was he to find.  
That though on pleasure she was bent,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;She had a frugal mind.  
  
The morning came, the chaise was brought,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But yet was not allowed  
To drive up to the door, lest all  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Should say that she was proud.  
  
So three doors off the chaise was stayed,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Where they did all get in;  
Six precious souls, and all agog  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To dash through thick and thin.  
  
Smack went the whip, round went the wheels,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Were never folks so glad!  
The stones did rattle underneath,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As if Cheapside were mad.  
  
John Gilpin at his horse's side  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Seized fast the flowing mane,  
And up he got, in haste to ride,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But soon came down again;  
  
For saddletree scarce reached had he,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His journey to begin,  
When, turning round his head, he saw  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Three customers come in.  
  
So down he came; for loss of time,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Although it grieved him sore,  
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Would trouble him much more.  
  
'Twas long before the customers  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Were suited to their mind,  
When Betty screaming came downstairs,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"The wine is left behind!"  
  
"Good lack!" quoth he, "yet bring it me,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My leathern belt likewise,  
In which I bear my trusty sword  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When I do exercise."  
  
Now Mistress Gilpin (careful soul!)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Had two stone bottles found,  
To hold the liquor that she loved,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And keep it safe and sound.  
  
Each bottle had a curling ear,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Through which the belt he drew,  
And hung a bottle on each side,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To make his balance true.  
  
Then over all, that he might be  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Equipped from top to toe,  
His long red cloak, well brushed and neat,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He manfully did throw.  
  
Now see him mounted once again  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Upon his nimble steed,  
Full slowly pacing o'er the stones,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With caution and good heed.  
  
But finding soon a smoother road  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Beneath his well-shod feet,  
The snorting beast began to trot,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Which galled him in his seat.  
  
"So, fair and softly!" John he cried,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But John he cried in vain;  
That trot became a gallop soon,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In spite of curb and rein.  
  
So stooping down, as needs he must  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Who cannot sit upright,  
He grasped the mane with both his hands,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And eke with all his might.  
  
His horse, who never in that sort  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Had handled been before,  
What thing upon his back had got,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Did wonder more and more.  
  
Away went Gilpin, neck or nought,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Away went hat and wig;  
He little dreamt, when he set out,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of running such a rig.  
  
The wind did blow, the cloak did fly  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Like streamer long and gay,  
Till, loop and button failing both.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At last it flew away.  
  
Then might all people well discern  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The bottles he had slung;  
A bottle swinging at each side,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As hath been said or sung.  
  
The dogs did bark, the children screamed,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Up flew the windows all;  
And every soul cried out, "Well done!"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As loud as he could bawl.  
  
Away went Gilpin—who but he?  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His fame soon spread around;  
"He carries weight! he rides a race!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;'Tis for a thousand pound!"  
  
And still as fast as he drew near,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;'Twas wonderful to view  
How in a trice the turnpike-men  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Their gates wide open threw.  
  
And now, as he went bowing down  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His reeking head full low,  
The bottles twain behind his back  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Were shattered at a blow.  
  
Down ran the wine into the road,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Most piteous to be seen,  
Which made the horse's flanks to smoke,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As they had basted been.  
   
But still he seemed to carry weight.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;With leathern girdle braced;  
For all might see the bottle-necks  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Still dangling at his waist.  
   
Thus all through merry Islington  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;These gambols he did play,  
Until he came unto the Wash  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Of Edmonton so gay;  
  
And there he threw the wash about  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On both sides of the way,  
Just like unto a trundling mop,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Or a wild goose at play.  
  
At Edmonton his loving wife  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;From the balcony spied  
Her tender husband, wondering much  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To see how he did ride.  
  
"Stop, stop, John Gilpin!—Here's the house!"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They all at once did cry;  
"The dinner waits, and we are tired;"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Said Gilpin—"So am I!"  
  
But yet his horse was not a whit  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Inclined to tarry there;  
For why?—his owner had a house  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Full ten miles off, at Ware.  
  
So like an arrow swift he flew,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Shot by an archer strong;  
So did he fly—which brings me to  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The middle of my song.  
  
Away went Gilpin, out of breath,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And sore against his will,  
Till at his friend the calender's  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His horse at last stood still.  
  
The calender, amazed to see  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His neighbour in such trim,  
Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And thus accosted him:  
  
"What news? what news? your tidings tell;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Tell me you must and shall—  
Say why bareheaded you are come,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Or why you come at all?"  
  
Now Gilpin had a pleasant wit,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And loved a timely joke;  
And thus unto the calender  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In merry guise he spoke:  
  
"I came because your horse would come;  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And, if I well forebode,  
My hat and wig will soon be here,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They are upon the road."  
  
The calender, right glad to find  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;His friend in merry pin,  
Returned him not a single word,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;But to the house went in;  
  
Whence straight he came with hat and wig,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;A wig that flowed behind,  
A hat not much the worse for wear,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Each comely in its kind.  
  
He held them up, and in his turn  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thus showed his ready wit:  
"My head is twice as big as yours,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They therefore needs must fit."  
  
"But let me scrape the dirt away,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That hangs upon your face;  
And stop and eat, for well you may  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Be in a hungry case."  
  
Said John, "It is my wedding-day,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And all the world would stare  
If wife should dine at Edmonton,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And I should dine at Ware."  
  
So turning to his horse, he said  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"I am in haste to dine;  
'Twas for your pleasure you came here,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;You shall go back for mine."  
  
Ah! luckless speech, and bootless boast!  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For which he paid full dear;  
For while he spake, a braying ass  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Did sing most loud and clear;  
  
Whereat his horse did snort, as he  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Had heard a lion roar,  
And galloped off with all his might,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As he had done before.  
   
Away went Gilpin, and away  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Went Gilpin's hat and wig;  
He lost them sooner than at first,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For why?—they were too big.  
  
Now Mistress Gilpin, when she saw  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Her husband posting down  
Into the country far away,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;She pulled out half-a-crown;  
  
And thus unto the youth she said  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That drove them to the "Bell,"  
"This shall be yours when you bring back  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My husband safe and well."  
   
The youth did ride, and soon did meet  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;John coming back amain;  
Whom in a trice he tried to stop,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By catching at his rein.  
  
But not performing what he meant,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And gladly would have done,  
The frighted steed he frighted more,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And made him faster run.  
  
Away went Gilpin, and away  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Went postboy at his heels,  
The postboy's horse right glad to miss  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The lumbering of the wheels.  
  
Six gentlemen upon the road,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thus seeing Gilpin fly,  
With postboy scampering in the rear.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;They raised the hue and cry.  
  
"Stop thief! stop thief! a highwayman!'"  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Not one of them was mute;  
And all and each that passed that way  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Did join in the pursuit.  
   
And now the turnpike-gates again  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Flew open in short space;  
The toll-man thinking, as before,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That Gilpin rode a race.  
  
And so he did, and won it too,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;For he got first to town;  
Nor stopped till where he had got up,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;He did again get down.  
  
Now let us sing, Long live the King,  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;And Gilpin, long live he;  
And when he next doth ride abroad.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;May I be there to see.  
